The Art of Reasoning
 (Introduction to Logic)
Intended learning outcomes
By the end of this topic, the learner should be able to:
   Distinguish between logical and ordinary interpretation of the
    term “argument”.
   Explain the terms in a logical argument and their
    connectedness
   Distinguish between the argument forms (standard and non-
    standard)
   Formulate simple arguments, identify and evaluate arguments
    from informal formulations
   Formulate argument paragraphs and use them in philosophical
    essays.
   Apply logic to convince, persuade and influence reasonable
    thought behavior and opinion formation
   Unveil fallacies (logical errors ) and devise ways to overcome
    them
The concept of an argument
   A claim made on basis of some evidence
   An expression consisting of a claim and
   supporting reasons.

  Logically speaking, an argument is NOT a
   dispute BUT
   a claim supported by reasons
Argument contd.
  Terms in a logical argument
   Proposition(s): statement of fact; asserts or negates; can
    be true or false (truth-value)
   Premise(s): proposition(s) that support the claim
   Conclusion: proposition that make the claim
  Hence an argument= a proposition or a set of
    propositions, one of which is makes the claim
    (conclusion) and rest of which give evidential
    support (premises).
Forms of arguments
Standard form                                      Non-standard form


Systematic order beginning with the                No orderly arrangement; either a
premises and ending with the                       premise or a conclusion may begin
conclusion                                         followed by the other(s)
Example:
1. Christians are God-fearing people               Examples:
2. God-fearing people are fair minded              Christians are fair minded people since
Therefore Christians are fair minded               they are God-fearing and God-fearing
                                                   people are fair minded. [begins with a conclusion
1.The    company     lacked    effective but ends with the premises]
coordination
2.The company also lacked proper Due to lack of effective coordination and
management                               proper management, the company
3. Lack of effective coordination and performed
                                         a conclusion]
                                                          poorly [begins with premises and ends with
proper management leads to poor
performance
Hence, the company performed poorly
Examples of standard form
1. Christians are God-fearing people
2. God-fearing people are fair minded
Therefore Christians are fair minded

1.The company lacked effective coordination
2.The company also lacked proper management
3.Lack of effective coordination and proper
management leads to poor performance
Hence, the company performed poorly
Examples (non-standard form)
Christians are fair minded people since all God-
fearing people are fair minded and Christians are
God-fearing. [begins with a conclusion but ends with
the premises]

Due to lack of effective coordination and proper
management, the company performed poorly
[begins with premises and ends with a conclusion]
Argument markers/indicators
 Premises and conclusion indicators
 Premises: since; due to; for the reason that;
    because; given, following, etc.
 Conclusion: therefore; so; hence etc.
Task: (a) Construct two arguments using the non-
 standard form
 (b) Rewrite the above arguments in standard form
Classification of arguments
Deductive Arguments                           Inductive Arguments
The conclusion follow from the premises      The conclusion follow from the
truthfully and necessarily                    premises as a matter of probability
The conclusion entail premises (i.e.         The conclusion contains more than
contain what is in the premises)              what is in the premises
Given the truth of the premises the
conclusion must be true (i.e. the truth of    The truth of the conclusion is not
the premises guarantee the truth of the       guaranteed by the truth of the premises
conclusion)                                   In most cases, a general conclusion is
Sometimes, a particular conclusion is        drawn from particular premises.
drawn from general premises.                  Examples:
                                              P1. Philosophers are critical thinkers
Examples:                                     P2. Historians are critical thinkers
P1. Philosophers are critical thinkers        P3. Scientists are critical thinkers
P2. Critical thinkers are reasonable people   Co. Therefore all scholars are critical thinkers
Co. Therefore philosophers are reasonable
people                                        P1. An eagle is a bird and it flies
                                              P2. A hornbill is a bird and it flies
P1. All human beings are thinkers             P3. A crow is a bird and it flies
P2. Chris is a human being                    P4. A sunbird is a bird and it flies
Co. Therefore Chris is a thinker              P5. A weaverbird is a bird and it flies
                                              Co. Therefore all birds fly
Examples (deductive argument)
P1. Philosophers are critical thinkers
P2. Critical thinkers are reasonable people
Co. Therefore philosophers are reasonable people

P1. All human beings are thinkers
P2. Chris is a human being
Co. Therefore Chris is a thinker
Examples (inductive argument)
P1. Philosophers are critical thinkers
P2. Historians are critical thinkers
P3. Scientists are critical thinkers
Co. Therefore all scholars are critical thinkers

P1. An eagle is a bird and it flies
P2. A hornbill is a bird and it flies
P3. A crow is a bird and it flies
P4. A sunbird is a bird and it flies
P5. A weaverbird is a bird and it flies
Co. Therefore all birds fly
Validity and Soundness
  Validity: is an inferential link whereby the truth in the
 premises is transmitted to the conclusion.
 An argument is valid when given the truth of the premises,
 the conclusion necessarily becomes true. [In other words,
 the conclusion entails the premises]
Which of the following arguments is valid?


P1. All men are mortal            P1. All men are liars
P2. James is a man                P2. James is a man
Co. Therefore James is mortal     Co. Therefore James is a liar
Soundness
An argument termed as sound when the following two
  conditions hold:
1) It is valid
2) All its propositions (i.e. premises and conclusions)
    are known to be true
Examples:
      P1. All living organisms reproduce
      P2. Bacteria is living organism
      Co. Therefore bacteria reproduces
Inductive strength
An inductive argument can either be strong or weak
A strong inductive argument is an inductive argument
 in which the truth of the premises really does prove
 that the conclusion is probably true;
Whereas
a weak inductive argument is an inductive argument in
 which the truth of the premises really does not prove
 that the conclusion is probably true.
Examples
Most musical artists are talented.
John is a musical artist.
Therefore, John probably is talented.
This is inductively strong.

John is a musical artist
John is handsome
Therefore, most musical artists are handsome.
This inductive argument is weak
Cogency
Cogency is quality of inductive arguments
An argument is said to be cogent when:
 1. It is a strong inductive argument; and
 2. All the premises are actually true.
Formal and material logic
Formal logic: studies the formal and structural aspects of
  reasoning; surveys the set of rules for making deductions
  that seem self evident.
    Studies the “how” of reasoning


Material logic: studies the content of reasoning; the
  soundness of arguments; the meaningful use of words in
  arguments
    Studies the “what” of reasoning
Class activity
1. Construct one inductive argument and one
   deductive argument
2. Construct a valid argument that is sound and a
   valid argument that is unsound.
3. Construct an argument that is valid and one that
   is invalid
4. Construct an inductively strong and an
   inductively weak argument.
5. Construct a cogent argument
Fallacies
 Fallacy:
 An argument that may seem to be correct, but
  that proves, on examination, not to be so.
 A logically erroneous argument, but
  psychologically persuasive or emotionally
  appealing
 Counterfeit arguments

 Classes of informal fallacies:
    Relevance

    Ambiguity

    Presumption
Fallacies of relevance
    In this type of arguments, the premises that are
    not relevant to the conclusion and therefore
    cannot possibly establish its truth
(a) Appeal to ignorance (argumentum ad
    ignorantiam)
    A proposition is argued to be true on grounds that it
    has not been shown to be false, or false on grounds
    that it has not been shown to be true.
    E.g. Ghosts do not exist since no one has proved that
    that they do.
    Lack of proof does not disprove existence of a thing
Fallacies contd.
(b) Appeal to authority (argumentum ad verecundiam)
  In order to persuade acceptance of a conclusion, an
  authority is appealed to, one who irrelevant to the matter at
  hand.
  E.g.
    Invoking a prominent politician’s view of morality to
     support a moral theory.
    Using a celebrity (e.g. a footballer) to advertise a product
Fallacies contd.
(c) Appeal to masses (argumentum ad populum)
  Committed when what is thought or believed to be the
  case (or supported) by the people is taken as the
  evidence to persuade acceptance of an argument.
  Commonly used by advertisers.
E.g.
   This pen is the best since “everyone” is using it;
   The corpuscular theory of light is true theory because
    almost all noteworthy scientists have agreed so.
Fallacies contd.
(d) Appeal to pity (argumentum ad misericordiam)
  The arguer evokes feeling of mercy or sympathy to
  persuade the listener accept the conclusion. Rather
  than give convincing reasons the arguer appeals to the
  emotions of the listener so as to be sympathized with.
  E.g. A man kills his wife and pleads guilty of murder.
  But in mitigation he pleads for forgiveness claiming
  that he’s now a widower and the sole bread winner of
  his three children that were left behind.
Fallacies contd.
(e) Argument against man (argumentum ad hominem)
  Attention (and in most cases attack) is deliberately directed to
  the person who poses the argument rather than the issue
  addressed to by the argument. Three types:
  (i) Abusive: The opponent attacks reasonableness, integrity,
  intelligence or any other part of the arguers character. E.g. Karl
  Marx’s theory of economics is not tenable because he was a known
  atheist.
  (ii) Circumstantial: The opponent attacks the accidental
  circumstances of the arguer. E.g. Catholic priests should keep off
  the discussion on abortion and women since they are unmarried.
  (iii) Tu quoque (you too): The opponent attacks the arguer on
  grounds that he/she (the arguer) is a victim hence has no
  reasonable authority over the issue at hand. E.g. Why do you tell
  me smoking is harmful yet you too are a smoker? Or Why teach
  me about HIV/AID yet you are infected?
Fallacies contd.
(f) Appeal to force (argumentum ad baculum)
  Force is used to coerce the acceptance of a conclusion.
  So the argument has to be accepted or else a bad
  consequence follows. No reasons are given to support
  the argument.
  E.g.
   All employees have to comply with the new policy;
    anyone with a different opinion can seek a job elsewhere.
   You have to sign this document for me or else I’ll tell the
    boss what you said about his wife.
Fallacies of ambiguity
      In this type of fallacies, the argument or the proposition in question is rendered unclear
      or absurd due to unclearness of the language that has been used to express it.

(a)   Equivocation
      A term that has more than one meaning is used in an
      argument leading to unclear or absurd conclusion.
      Example 1:
         Half a loaf is better than nothing
          Nothing is better than true love
          Therefore half a loaf is better than true love.
      The term nothing has two different senses; hence leading to an absurd
      conclusion.
      Example 2:
        The end of a thing is its perfection
        Death is the end of life
        Therefore death is the perfection of life
Fallacies contd.
 (b) Amphiboly
 A phrase that has more than one meaning is used hence leading to
 unclear consequence
 E.g. The shooting of the hunters was finished quickly
 (c) Accent
 The way words in a statement are articulated leads to different
 meanings especially if the underlying sentence is not properly
 punctuated
 E.g.
   We should not speak ill of our friends
   Woman without her man is lost
Fallacies of Presumption
  In this class, the claim is made but on basis of some
  presumed circumstances. In some cases, restrictions are
  made on basis of presumptions
  (a) False dichotomy
  It is assumed that there are only two alternatives of an outcome; things
  are either black or white, one is either for or against, things are either
  existent or non-existent, statements either true or false, etc.
E.g.
     If you do not support my views then you are anti-development
     Are you also supporting them? Then you don’t love me.
Fallacies of presumption contd.
 (b) Complex question
 A single question that has more than one visible part is
 posed. If one is restricted to answer it either ‘yes’ or ‘no’
 he/she finds himself/herself in an undesirable outcome.
 E.g.
   Have you stopped stealing?
   Didn’t you hide after killing him?
Fallacies of presumption contd.
(C) False cause
 An event or an occasion that follows an other is taken
 to be its cause. The arguer presumes that the event has
 been caused by what it temporarily follows.
 Eg. Mr X saw a black cat in the morning and had a car
 accident later in the day. Therefore the accident was
 caused by the black cat.
Fallacies of presumption contd.

(d) Fallacy of division
  Occurs when one claims that something true of a thing
  must also be true of all or some of its parts. Thus someone
  forms a conclusion from a true aspect of a thing assuming
  the true thing also applies to all or some of its individuals or
  parts.
Example:
  Strathmore university is top ranking in this region, hence
  every student in Strathmore university is bright.
Fallacies of presumption contd.
 (e) Fallacy of composition
 Occurs when one claims that something true of a some
 parts of thing must also be true of the whole thing. Thus
 one argue that what applies to the part also applies to the
 whole thing.
 Example:
   Since every part of this machine is light, the whole
    machine is light.
   The department of philosophy has good lecturers, hence
    the whole university has good lecturers
Fallacies of presumption contd.
Fallacy of Accident
  The fallacy of accident is committed when one applies
  a principle that is true as a general rule, to a specific
  case.
  E.g. Strathmore university is full of good people
      Ken is staff of Strathmore university
      Therefore, Ken is a good person
Fallacies of presumption contd.
Fallacy of Converse Accident
 This fallacy is committed when one derives from a
 specific case (or an instance) a general rule that is
 deemed to be true on the basis of the truth of the
 specific case.
 Mr. Kamau innovated a power pump
 Therefore Kenyans are great innovators.
 It should be obvious that a single instance is not enough to
 establish the truth of such a general principle. Since it's easy for
 this conclusion to be false even though the premise is true, the
 argument is unreliable.
     Class activity: Detecting fallacies
Name and explain fallacies in the following arguments:
1.    I cannot trust any Christian since my pastor is insincere.
2.    Mary ate chocolate last night and this morning she had heavy flu; so the
      chocolate must have caused this flu.
3.    You should take what professor Joseph says about health more seriously
      because he is an renowned historian.
4.    Will you contribute the money for environmental conservation or you are
      on the side of environmental destruction?
5.    What you are saying about women cannot be true since you are a
      bachelor!
6.    The university should consider my application because I’m an orphan
      and the only surviving daughter of late previous chairman of the
      university council.
7.    You cannot excel in mathematics since you are a slow thinker; after all
      your grandfather was an infamous witch!
8.    Give me the cash or else I’ll tell everyone what you did on Christmas day.
