CRITICAL WRITING SKILLS:
Page 2
Page 7
Page 11
Page 21
Page 28
Page 30
Page 32
Page 35
Page 37

-

Critical Writing
Sentence Structure
Writing Essays
Referencing and Bibliographies
Using Paragraphs
Using the Comma
Using the Semi-Colon and Colon
Using the Apostrophe
The Art of Editing

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

CRITICAL WRITING
What is critical writing?
It is common for feedback on student writing to focus on the need to engage more critically with
the source material. Typical comments from tutors are: ‘too descriptive’, or ‘not enough critical
analysis’. This Study Guide gives ideas for how to improve the level of critical analysis you
demonstrate in your writing.
What is critical writing?
The most characteristic features of critical writing are:
A clear and confident refusal to accept the conclusions of other writers without
evaluating the arguments and evidence that they provide;
A balanced presentation of reasons why the conclusions of other writers may be accepted
or may need to be treated with caution;
A clear presentation of your own evidence and argument, leading to your conclusion; and
A recognition of the limitations in your own evidence, argument, and conclusion.
What is descriptive writing?
The most characteristic features of descriptive writing are that it will describe something, but
will not go beyond an account of what appears to be there. A certain amount of descriptive
writing is needed to establish for example:
The setting of the research;
A general description of a piece of literature, or art;
The list of measurements taken;
The timing of the research;
An account of the biographical details of a key figure in the discipline; or
A brief summary of the history leading up to an event or decision.
The difference between descriptive writing and critical writing
With descriptive writing you are not developing argument; you are merely setting the
background within which an argument can be developed. You are representing the situation as it
stands, without presenting any analysis or discussion.
Descriptive writing is relatively simple. There is also the trap that it can be easy to use many,
many words from your word limit, simply providing description. In providing only description,
you are presenting but not transforming information; you are reporting ideas but not taking them
forward in any way. An assignment using only descriptive writing would therefore gain few
marks.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

With critical writing you are participating in the academic debate. This is more challenging and
risky. You need to weigh up the evidence and arguments of others, and to contribute your own.
You will need to:
Consider the quality of the evidence and argument you have read;
Identify key positive and negative aspects you can comment upon;
Assess their relevance and usefulness to the debate that you are engaging in for your
assignment; and
Identify how best they can be woven into the argument that you are developing.
A much higher level of skill is clearly needed for critical writing than for descriptive writing, and
this is reflected in the higher marks it is given.
Finding your academic voice
Try to get into the habit of writing critically, by making sure that you read critically, and that you
include critique in your writing. When you engage in critical writing you are developing your
own academic voice within your subject. Wellington et al. (2005 p.84) offer some suggestions
for distinguishing between the academic and the non-academic voice. They suggest that the
academic voice will involve:
“Healthy scepticism … but not cynicism;
Confidence … but not ‘cockiness’ or arrogance;
Judgement which is critical … but not dismissive;
Opinions … without being opinionated;
Careful evaluation of published work … not serial shooting at random targets;
Being ‘fair’: assessing fairly the strengths and weaknesses of other people’s ideas and
writing … without prejudice;
Making judgements on the basis of considerable thought and all the available evidence …
as opposed to assertions without reason.”
Ref: Wellington J., Bathmaker A., Hunt C., McCulloch G. and Sikes P. (2005). Succeeding
with your doctorate. London: Sage.
Stringing together of quotes
It can be tempting to string together quotes to support an argument, feeling that the more quotes
you include, the stronger your argument. It is important, however, to remember that you also
need to interpret the quotes to the reader, and to explain their relevance, discuss their validity,
and show how they relate to other evidence.
Strategic use of paragraphs
There are several ways in which you can use the paragraph to enhance your critical writing.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

You can use paragraphs to make a clear and visual separation between descriptive writing and
critical analysis, by switching to a new paragraph when you move from description to critical
writing, and vice versa. This can help in:
Emphasising to the reader that you are including both description and critical analysis, by
providing a visual representation of their separation; and
Pushing you to produce the necessary critical writing, especially if you find that your
description paragraphs are always longer, or more frequent, than your critical analysis
paragraphs.
A paragraph break can provide a brief pause for your readers within a longer argument; giving
them the opportunity to make sure they are keeping up with your reasoning. Paragraphs that are
overly long can require readers to hold too much in their mind at once, resulting in their having
to re-read the material until they can identify the point you are making.
You can also use paragraphs to push yourself to include critical writing alongside descriptive
writing or referencing, by considering each paragraph almost as an essay in miniature. Within
each paragraph you would:
Introduce the point you want to make;
Make the point, with supporting evidence;
Reflect critically on the point.
If it’s worth including, it’s worth telling us why.
A certain amount of descriptive writing is essential, particularly in the earlier parts of the essay
or assignment or dissertation. Beyond that, however, there is a danger that too much descriptive
writing will use up valuable words from your word limit, and reduce the space you have for the
critical writing that will get you higher marks.
A useful habit to get into is to make sure that, if you describe some evidence relevant to your
argument, you need then to explain to the reader why it is relevant. The logic of your explanation
contributes to the critical component of your writing.
So, a sentence or two might describe and reference the evidence, but this is not enough in itself.
The next few sentences need to explain what this evidence contributes to the argument you are
making. This may feel like duplication at first, or that you are explaining something that is
obvious, but it is your responsibility to ensure that the relevance of the evidence is explained to
the reader; you should not simply assume that the reader will be following the same logic as you,
or will just work out the relevance of the quote or data you have described.
Line of argument
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

The other key element in critical writing is the overall structure of your piece of writing. For
maximum effectiveness, your writing needs to have a line, or lines of argument running through
it from the Introduction to the Conclusion.
Just as you have used paragraphs on a micro scale to present your critical writing, so you need to
consider the ordering of those paragraphs within the overall structure. The aim is to lead your
readers carefully through the thread of your argument, to a well-supported conclusion.
Example of effective critical writing
The text below is an example of good critical writing, and is based on essay material supplied by
University of Leicester’s School of Psychology. The author refers to the available evidence, but
also evaluates the validity of that evidence, and assesses what contribution it can realistically
make to the debate.
There are a number of inherent methodological difficulties in evaluating treatment
efficacy in this area, and this has contributed to controversy within the research
literature surrounding treatment outcomes for this group of offenders (Marshall, 1997).
Firstly, while there is no doubt that the primary criterion of treatment success is a
reduction in the rate of re-offending (Marshall et al., 1999), reconviction data does not,
in isolation, provide a realistic representation of actual levels of re-offending by this
group. It is well established that there is a discrepancy between re-offending and
reconviction rates: the latter underestimating the number of offences committed (Grubin,
1999). Indeed, a significant proportion of offences committed by offenders are either
unreported, or do not result in the offender being convicted (Abel et al., 1987).
You can see how the author is considering the available evidence, but also the limitations on that
evidence, and will be taking all of this into account in drawing conclusions.
Checklist for an overall review of your writing
It is always worth taking a critical look at your own writing before submitting it for assessment.
The kinds of questions that might be useful to ask at that stage are:
What is the balance between descriptive and critical writing?
While a certain amount of description is necessary to set the context for your analysis, the main
characteristic of academic writing is its critical element. A useful way to check this balance in
your own writing is to use two coloured pens and to mark in the margin whether the lines are
descriptive or critical. The balance will change at different points, but you need to make sure
there is enough of the colour that represents critical writing.
Why should the reader be convinced by what I’ve just written?
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Remember that, just as you are asking ‘Why should I believe what I’ve just read?’, the readers of
your work will be asking the same question of your writing. A critical read through your own
writing may reveal gaps in your logic, which you can rectify before you submit it for the critique
of others.
Is my conclusion trailed and supported sufficiently well by my preceding analysis and
argument?
Check out the conclusions that you have drawn, then locate and check the supporting evidence
you provide earlier on. This is a good way of making sure you haven’t forgotten to include a
crucial piece of evidence. It is also a way of checking that, when your reader comes to the end of
your writing, the conclusions make sense, rather than being a surprise, or an unconvincing leap
of logic.
Have I included any unsubstantiated statements?
Sometimes a generalised, sweeping statement can slip through: the kind of statement that might
be acceptable on conversation, but not in academic writing. There are three main ways of dealing
with such statements:
Present the evidence to support the statement
Re-phrase the statement to sound more cautious e.g.: ‘it could be argued …’ or ‘this
suggests that …’
Remove the statement

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

SENTENCE STRUCTURE
This guide explains how sentences are constructed and how different types of sentences are
formed. It shows you how to punctuate each type correctly and how to combine different
sentence types for effective written communication.
What is a complete sentence?
Sentences provide us with the framework for the clear written expression of our ideas. The aim
in writing is always to write in complete sentences which are correctly punctuated. Sentences
always begin with a capital letter and end in either a full stop, exclamation or question mark.
A complete sentence always contains a verb, expresses a complete idea and makes sense
standing alone.
Andy reads quickly. This is a complete sentence as it contains a verb (reads), expresses a
complete idea and it does not need any further information for the reader to understand the
sentence.
When Andy reads.
This is an incomplete sentence. It contains a verb, but the opening word
when tells us that something happens when Andy reads; we need more information to complete
the idea.
When Andy reads, he reads quickly. This is now a complete sentence, as the whole idea of the
sentence has been expressed.
The following examples show the incomplete sentences in italics.
There is another theory. Which should not be ignored. 
There is another theory, which should not be ignored. 
The proposal was finally rejected. Although they considered it. 
Although they considered the proposal, it was finally rejected. 
To check that you are writing in complete sentences, try reading your sentences aloud, pausing
as indicated by the punctuation. Can each sentence stand alone as a complete thought? If further
information is needed to complete the idea, then it is not a complete sentence.
Types of sentences
As well as being able to write in complete sentences, it is important to be able to use a variety of
sentence types that are correctly punctuated.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Sentences are made up of clauses: groups of words that express a single idea. There are two
types of clauses: independent clauses and dependent clauses.
Independent clauses can stand alone as complete sentences.
Dependent clauses need an independent clause to complete its meaning.
Different types of sentences are made up of different combinations of these two types of clauses.
Simple sentences consist of just one independent clause; it requires only one punctuation mark
at the end (a full stop, exclamation or question mark). For example: The essay was late.
Compound sentences are made by joining simple sentences. We join sentences which are
closely related in content to make the writing more fluid. We can join simple sentences with a
comma and a word such as: and, but, so, yet.
For example: The essay was late, so he lost marks.
We can also join simple sentences with a semi-colon.
The essay was late; he lost marks.
Complex sentences are made when we combine an independent clause with a dependent clause.
The dependent clause in the following example is in italics.
Because his essay was late, he lost marks.
When the dependent clause comes first, as in the example above, it is separated from the
independent clause with a comma.
When the sentence begins with the independent clause, there is no need to separate the clauses
with a comma.
He lost marks because the essay was late.
Comparing these two examples, it can be seen that the emphasis tends to fall on the clause at the
beginning of the sentence. Vary your placement of dependent clauses in order to emphasise the
most important idea in the sentence. Common ways to begin a dependent clause are: although,
as, because, even though, if, instead, through, when, whenever, where, while. Whilst more than
one dependent clause can be used in a sentence, they must always be combined with an
independent clause to complete the idea. Again, the dependent clauses in this example are in
italics.
Although there are many dissenters, many of whom were prominent citizens, the policy still
stands today.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Different types of sentences can be combined to form compound-complex sentences. In the
example below, the central independent clause combines two sentence types. It serves as both the
ending of the complex sentence and the beginning of the compound sentence.
When considering owning a pet, you must calculate the cost, or the animal may suffer.
When punctuating a compound-complex sentence, apply the rules for both compound and
complex sentences. The example above begins with a dependent clause separated from the
central clause by a comma, as in the rule for complex sentences. At the end of the sentence the
independent clause is joined by a comma and the word or, as in the rule for the compound
sentences.
Using different sentence types
Once you are aware of the different types of sentence construction, you can then choose and
correctly punctuate the most helpful type of sentences for the expression of your idea.
The following series of short sentences, whilst grammatically correct, are jerky and abrupt.
Jackie is confident. She is a good speaker. She is considered to be an excellent presenter.
Everyone finds her interesting. No one has been critical. She is supportive of others.
These sentences can be combined to make more fluid writing by combining sentences which are
closely related, using the rules described earlier.
Jackie is confident, and she is a good speaker. She is considered to be an excellent
presenter. Everyone finds her interesting, and no one has been critical as she is supportive of
others.
The following sentence is overly long and complicated.
If you consider buying a puppy, whatever age or breed, always consider the type of house
you have, as this is the most important first step, because without considering this first you can
find yourself with a dog that, despite your good intentions, you just cannot keep.
By shortening sentences that could confuse the reader, you can make the writing easier to follow.
If you consider buying a puppy, whatever age or breed, always consider the type of house
you have. This is the most important first step. Without considering this first, you can find
yourself with a dog that you just cannot keep, despite your good intentions.
Summary
Use these guidelines to identify types of sentence construction in your own writing. To check the
clarity of your sentence structure, try reading the writing aloud, stopping as indicated by the
punctuation. Does each sentence stand on its own as a complete idea? Use the guidelines to
either break an overly long sentence into shorter sentences, or join abrupt sentences together to
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

make the writing more fluid. Varying the length and type of sentences whilst ensuring correct
punctuation, will improve the clarity of your written expression.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

WRITING ESSAYS
The essay is used as a form of assessment in many academic disciplines, and is used in both
coursework and exams. It is the most common focus for study consultations among students.
Why essays?
To produce a high quality essay you need to demonstrate your ability:
To understand the precise task set by the title;
To identify, appropriate material to read;
To understand and evaluate that material;
To select the most relevant material to refer to in your essay;
To construct an effective argument; and
To arrive at a well-supported conclusion.
The need to use such a wide range of academic skills is probably the main reason why the essay
format is so popular with tutors as an assignment. The word limit adds to the challenge by
requiring that all of these skills be demonstrated within a relatively small number of words.
Producing incisive and clear written work within a word limit is an important skill in itself,
which will be useful in many aspects of life beyond university.
Feedback
Good, constructively critical feedback can give you excellent guidance on how to improve your
essay writing. It is worth attending to all of the suggestions and comments you receive, and
trying to act on them. Common criticism given to students is that their essay:
Does not keep to the title that was set;
Has a poor structure;
Is too descriptive;
Does not have enough critical writing.
These criticisms highlight the three basic elements of good essay writing:
Attending closely to the title;
Establishing a relevant structure that will help you show the development of your
argument; and
Using critical writing as much as possible; with descriptive writing being used where
necessary, but kept to a minimum.
Attending closely to the title
The most important starting point is to listen carefully to what the essay title is telling you.
You need to read every single word of it, and to squeeze out as much guidance you can from the
title. Then you need to plan how you will respond to every single element of the title. The
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

guidance given to you by the title is freely available, and is your best clue to what is required in
your essay. As a tutor has said (Creme and Lea, 1997 p41): ‘When my students ask me about
essay writing, there are three main pieces of advice that I give them. One, answer the question.
Two, answer the question. Three, answer the question.’
This is important at the start, but also throughout your writing, as it can be easy to drift away and
waste valuable words from your word limit by writing material that may be interesting, but
which is not relevant to the title set.
Brainstorming
To start you off, and to minimise the likelihood of writer’s block, a useful exercise is to do a
‘brainstorm’ of all your ideas in connection with the essay title. It can be a way of making a lot
of progress quite quickly.
It can be stressful and very difficult trying to work out solely in your mind how to tackle an
essay title; asking yourself questions such as:
What structure should I use?
What are my main points?
What reading do I need to do?
Have I got enough evidence?
It can be much less stressful to throw all your thoughts down on paper, before you start trying to
find answers to these questions. In these early stages of your thinking you may not be sure which
of your ideas you want to follow up and which you will be discarding. So, don’t feel you have to
make that decision in your head before you write anything. Instead, you can catch all of your
ideas, in no particular order, on a sheet or two of A4. Once they are down there it will be easier
for you to start to review them critically and to see where you need to focus your reading and
note taking.
Breaking it down then building it up
Essentially, this is what you are doing within the essay process: breaking ideas down, then
building them up again. You need to:
Break down the essay title into its component parts, and consider possible ways of
addressing them;
Work with these component parts, as you select your reading and make relevant notes;
Build up the essay using the material you have collected; ordering it; presenting and
discussing it; and forming it into a coherent argument.
Throughout this process, the essay title is the single immovable feature. You begin there; you
end there; and everything in between needs to be placed in relation to that title.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Efficient reading
All three of the processes described above will inform your decisions about what you need to
read for a particular essay. If left unplanned, the reading stage can swallow up huge amounts of
time. Fortunately, there is scope for developing efficiency in several ways:
Making intelligent decisions, based on your initial planning, about which sources to
target, so you don’t spend time reading less relevant, or even completely irrelevant
material;
Reading with a purpose, so that you are looking out for particularly relevant material,
rather than paying equal attention to material that is less relevant;
Systematic note taking, so that you record the most relevant material, and that you have
full reference details (including page numbers of direct quotes) of all material you may
end up using.
While a certain level of efficiency is desirable, it is also important to remain flexible enough to
identify relevant and interesting ideas that you had not anticipated.
Writing as thinking
You can use the writing process to help you think through, clarify and develop your early ideas
about how you might respond to the title that has been set: ‘you may not know what you think
until you have written it down’ (Creme & Lea, 1997 p115).
As with teaching, it is often not until you try to communicate an argument and its evidence that
you find where the gaps are in your knowledge or argument. So don’t be afraid of writing down
your ideas before they are fully formed, or in the ‘right’ order.
Writing is an active and constructive process; it is not merely a neutral recording of your
thoughts. It is therefore useful to go into the writing process expecting to make revisions. The
first words you write do not have to be part of the final version. Editing your writing as you
develop your ideas is a positive not a negative process: the more you cross out, re-write, and
reorder, the better your essay should become.
Establishing a relevant structure to support your argument
All essays need structure. The structure may be strong and clear, or it may be unobtrusive and
minimal but, in a good essay, it will be there.
Underpinning the structure will the ‘argument’ your essay is making. Again this may be strong
and obvious, or it may be almost invisible, but it needs to be there. In different subject areas, and
with different styles of writing, the term ‘argument’ may seem more or less relevant. However,
even in those essays that appear to be highly creative, unscientific, or personal, an argument of
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

some kind is being made. It is the argument, and how you decide to present and back up your
argument, that will influence your decision on how to structure your essay.
The essay structure is not an end in itself, but a means to an end: the end is the quality of the
argument. By creating a relevant structure, you make it much easier for yourself to present an
effective argument. There are several generic structures that can help you start to think about
your essay structure e.g.:
Chronological;
Thematic;
By context;
Comparative.
These can be useful starting points, but you will probably decide to work with a more
complicated structure e.g.:
Overall chronological structure; broken down by comparisons according to the elements
of the title;
Overall thematic structure; broken down by sub-themes;
Overall comparative structure; broken down by context.
In addition to these macro-structures you will probably need to establish a micro-structure
relating to the particular elements you need to focus on e.g.: evidence / policy / theory / practice /
case studies / examples / debates.
Fluid structures
You may feel that, for your particular essay, structures like these feel too rigid. You may wish to
create a more flexible or fluid structure. Perhaps a more suitable word than ‘structure’ in those
cases may be ‘pattern’, or ‘impression’, or ‘atmosphere’; although these merge into the field of
creative writing rather than essay writing.
An analogy could be that of symphony writing. The composers Haydon and Mozart, working in
the 18th century, tended to write symphonies to fit reliably and closely within what was called
‘symphonic form’. This set out a pattern for the numbers of movements within the symphony,
and for the general structure of writing within each movement. The continued popularity of their
work today shows that they clearly managed to achieve plenty of interest and variety within that
basic structure.
Later composers moved away from strict symphonic form. Some retained a loose link to it while
others abandoned it completely, in favour of more fluid patterns. It would be rare, however, to
find a symphony that was without structure or pattern of any kind; it would probably not be
satisfactory either to play or to listen to. Similarly, a structure of some kind is probably essential
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

for every essay, however revolutionary. Your decisions on structure will be based on a
combination of:
The requirements of your department;
The potential of the essay title; and
Your own preferences and skill.
An iterative, not necessarily a linear process
The process of essay planning and writing does not need to be a linear process, where each stage
is done only once. It is often an iterative process i.e.: a process where earlier stages are repeated
when they can be revised in the light of subsequent work. A possible iterative process is:
Analyse the title
Brainstorm relevant ideas
Read around the title, making relevant notes
Prepare a first draft
Analyse the title again
Critically review your first draft in the light of this further analysis
Read further to fill in gaps
Prepare final draft
Critically edit the final draft
Submit the finished essay.
‘Helping your readers’
This section heading is in quotes as it is also the heading of chapter 8, pages 80-92, in Barass
(1982). Barass (1982 p80) makes the simple but valid statement, that:
‘By making things easy for your readers, you help yourself to convey information and ideas.’
The tutors reading and marking your essays deserves your consideration. They will be reading
and marking many, many student essays. If you make your argument hard to follow, so that they
need to re-read a paragraph (or more) to try to make sense of what you have written, you will
cause irritation, and make their job slower. Realistically, it is possible that they may even decide
not to make that effort. It is your task to present your argument in a way that your audience can
follow; it is not your audience’s job to launch an investigation to detect the points you are trying
to make.
Your tutors will not necessarily be looking for the perfect, revolutionary, unique, special essay;
they would be very happy to read a reasonably well-planned, well-argued and well-written essay.
They will not want to pull your essay to pieces. They would much rather enjoy reading it, and be
satisfied by the thread of your argument. In the words of a tutor: ‘I’m looking for focus, for a
voice that I feel confident with and not bored by – someone who knows the area and is going to
take me round the issues in an objective, informed and interesting way.’ Stott (2001 p 37).
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

The introduction
A powerful introduction is invaluable. It can engage your readers, and can give them confidence
that you have thought carefully about the title, and about how you are going to address it. A
useful generic structure is to:
Begin with a general point about the central issue;
Show your understanding of the task that has been set;
Show how you plan to address the title in your essay structure;
Make a link to the first point.
It may be possible to use only one paragraph for your introduction, but it may fall more easily
into two or more. You will need to adapt and extend this basic structure to fit with your own
discipline and the precise task set.
Here is an example of an introduction for an essay entitled:
Examine and compare the nature and development of the tragic figures of Macbeth and Dr
Faustus in their respective plays.
Begin with a general point:
Dr Faustus and Macbeth are both plays that show their respective playwrights at the
pinnacle of their careers.
Show your understanding of the task set:
When comparing the nature of the two plays’ respective heroes, both parallels and
contrasts can be found.
Show how you plan to address the title:
In the first section of this essay, the role of the tragic hero will be considered … The
second section of the essay will examine the nature … Finally, a comparison will be
made of the development of the two …
Make a link to the first point:
In examining the characters’ tragic qualities, a useful starting point is Aristotle’s
definition of tragedy…
Although the introduction appears at the beginning of your essay, you may prefer to write it
towards the end of the drafting process: ‘It is only when you have completed a piece of writing
that you can introduce it to the reader.’ (Crème & Lea, 1997 p115)
The heart of the essay
The middle part of the essay must fulfil the promises made in your introduction, and must
support your final conclusions. Failure to meet either or both of these requirements will irritate
your reader, and will demonstrate a lack of self-critique and of editing.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

The central part of your essay is where the structure needs to do its work, however explicit or
implicit your chosen structure may be. The structure you choose needs to be one that will be
most helpful to you in addressing the essay title. The content of this central part will probably
contain: ideas; explanations; evidence; relevant referencing; and relevant examples. It will be
characterised by:
Appropriate academic style;
Interesting and engaging writing;
Clarity of thought and expression,
Sensible ordering of material, to support and the development of ideas and the
development of argument.
Conclusion
A powerful conclusion is a valuable tool. The aim is to leave your reader feeling that you have
done a good job. A generic structure that you may find useful is:
Brief recap of what you have covered in relation to the essay title;
Reference to the larger issue
Evaluation of the main arguments
Highlighting the most important aspects
The example below relates to the essay title used on the previous page.
Brief recap:
The characters of Macbeth and Faustus are very similar in many respects; for example
they both willingly follow a path that leads to their damnation. ….
Reference to the larger issue:
The differences lie in the development of the characters in what are essentially two
different types of plays.
Evaluation of the main arguments:
As has been shown, the character of Macbeth has a nadir from which he ascends at the
conclusion of the play. This is in keeping with Aristotle’s definition of tragedy. For
Faustus however, there is no such ascension. This fits with the style of the morality play:
the erring Faustus must be seen to be humbled at his end for the morality to be effective.
Highlighting the most important aspects:
It is this strong element of morality in Dr Faustus that ultimately divides the two leading
characters.
Being a critical writer
After attending closely to the title; and establishing a useful structure; a third main element in the
essay-writing process is the confident use of ‘critical writing’. The most characteristic features of
critical writing are:
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

A clear and confident refusal to accept the conclusions of other writers without
evaluating the arguments and evidence that they provide;
A balanced presentation of reasons why the conclusions of other writers may be accepted
or may need to be treated with caution;
A clear presentation of your own evidence and argument, leading to your conclusion; and
A recognition of the limitations in your own evidence, argument, and conclusion.
With critical writing, you are doing work with the evidence you are using, by adding a level of
examination and evaluation. Stott (2001 p37) proposes that, ‘Knowledge-telling is the
regurgitation of knowledge in an essay. But knowledge-transfer is what’s crucial: the ability to
manipulate that basic, raw material in order to make a convincing argument’.
One way to practise critical writing is to make sure that you don’t leave any description to speak
for itself, if it is part of your evidence and argument. If a quote or piece of data is worth
including, then it’s also worth explaining why you’ve included it: ‘Do not leave your reader to
work out the implications of any statement.’ (Barass 1982 p80).
Another useful tool to support critical writing is the paragraph! Aim to present one idea per
paragraph. Within the paragraph you could:
Introduce the idea/piece of evidence/quote/stage of argument;
Present the idea/piece of evidence/quote/stage of argument;
Comment on it – this is where you demonstrate your critical thinking and writing.
A different pattern would be to use a paragraph to present and describe an idea/piece of
evidence/quote/stage of argument, then to use the subsequent paragraph to explain its relevance.
Editing
Finally, you need to take a break from your essay so that you can return to it with fresh eyes for
the final editing. ‘Editing and proof reading are not the icing on the cake, as some people think.
They are absolutely crucial because it is only at this stage that the student can see that the
argument hangs together, has a sequence and is well expressed. Editing is both difficult and
important.’ (Stott, 2001 p39)
Yes, editing is important, but no it does not need to be difficult. You’ve done most of the hard
work already in the reading, evaluating, and writing. Also, criticising your writing tends to be
easier than creating it in the first place.
Presentation
A tutor can learn a worrying amount about the quality of your essay simply from how it looks on
the page. The lengths of paragraphs; the lengths of sentences; the neatness of the reference list;
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

the balance of length between different sections; all offer insight into the kind of essay they are
about to read. In general, think ‘short and straightforward’. Shorter words are often preferable to
longer words, unless there is some specific vocabulary that you need to include to demonstrate
your skill. Short to middle length sentences are almost always preferable to longer ones. And
over-long paragraphs tend to demonstrate that you are not clear about the specific points you are
making. Of course, these are general points, and there may be some occasions, or some subject
areas, where long paragraphs are appropriate.
Accurate grammar and spelling are important.
Consistently poor grammar or spelling can give the impression of lack of care, and lack of clarity
of thought. Careless use of commas can actually change the meaning of a sentence. And
inaccurate spelling and poor grammar can make for very irritating reading for the person
marking it. The previous sentence began with ‘And’. This practice is now widely accepted where
it makes good sense. It is however possible that some tutors may still prefer not to see it.
Summary of key points
The title is the most important guidance you have. The task ahead is nothing more and
nothing less than is stated in the title. When in doubt about any aspect of your reading for
the essay, or about your writing, the first step is to go back and consult the essay title.
This can be surprisingly helpful. It informs directly: the choice of reading; the structure
you choose for the essay; which material to include and exclude; what to do with the
material you use; and how to introduce and conclude.
A relevant and useful structure to support the presentation of your response to the title is
vital.
Expect to undertake an iterative process of planning, reading, drafting, reviewing,
planning, reading, re-drafting, and editing.
Editing is a crucial part of the process not an optional extra.
References
Barass R, (1982) Students must write: a guide to better writing in coursework and
examinations. London: Methuen.
Creme P & Lea MR (1997) Writing at university: a guide for students. Buckingham:
Open University Press.
Stott R, (2001) The essay writing process. Chapter 3 pp 36-58. In Making your case: a
practical guide to essay writing. Eds. Stott R, Snaith A, & Rylance R. Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

REFERENCING AND BIBLIOGRAPHIES
This brief study guide aims to help you to understand why you should include references to the
information sources that you use to underpin your writing. It explains the main principles of
accurately referencing such sources in your work.
Why reference?
When you are writing an essay, report, dissertation or any other form of academic writing, your
own thoughts and ideas inevitably build on those of other writers, researchers or teachers. It is
essential that you acknowledge your debt to the sources of data, research and ideas on which you
have drawn by including references to, and full details of, these sources in your work.
Referencing your work allows the reader:
To distinguish your own ideas and findings from those you have drawn from the work of
others;
To follow up in more detail the ideas or facts that you have referred to.
Before you write
Whenever you read or research material for your writing, make sure that you include in your
notes, or on any photocopied material, the full publication details of each relevant text that you
read. These details should include:
Surname(s) and initial(s) of the author(s);
The date of publication;
The title of the text;
If it is a paper, the title of the journal and volume number;
If it is a chapter of an edited book, the book's title and editor(s);
The publisher and place of publication (Note: The publisher of a book should not be
confused with the printer – the publisher's name is normally on a book's main title page,
and often on the book's spine too);
The first and last page numbers if it is a journal article or a chapter in an edited book.
For particularly important points, or for parts of texts that you might wish to quote word for
word, also include in your notes the specific page reference.

When to use references
Your source should be acknowledged every time the point that you make, or the data or other
information that you use, is substantially that of another writer and not your own. As a very
rough guide, while the introduction and the conclusions to your writing might be largely based
on your own ideas, within the main body of your report, essay or dissertation, you would expect
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

to be drawing on, and thus referencing your debt to, the work of others in each main section or
paragraph. Look at the ways in which your sources use references in their own work, and avoid
plagiarism.
What is plagiarism?
The Oxford English Dictionary defines plagiarism as the taking and using as one's own ... the
thoughts, writings, or inventions of another. In an academic context, plagiarism implies a
deliberate act on the part of the writer or researcher to use the work, ideas or expressions of
others as if they were his or her own. Deliberate plagiarism, therefore, is academic cheating,
Referencing styles
There are many different referencing conventions in common use. Each department will have its
own preferred format, and every journal or book editor has a set of 'house rules'. This guide aims
to explain the general principles by giving details of the two most commonly used formats, the
'author, date' system and footnotes or endnotes. Once you have understood the principles
common to all referencing systems you should be able to apply the specific rules set by your own
department.
How to reference using the 'author, date' system
In the 'author, date' system (often referred to as the 'Harvard' system) very brief details of the
source from which a discussion point or piece of factual information is drawn are included in the
text. Full details of the source are then given in a reference list or bibliography at the end of the
text. This allows the writer to fully acknowledge her/his sources, without significantly
interrupting the flow of the writing.
1. Citing your source within the text
As the name suggests, the citation in the text normally includes the name(s) (surname only) of
the author(s) and the date of the publication. This information is usually included in brackets at
the most appropriate point in the text.
The seminars that are often a part of humanities courses can provide opportunities for
students to develop the communication and interpersonal skills that are valued by
employers (Lyon, 1992).
The text reference above indicates to the reader that the point being made draws on a work by
Lyon, published in 1992. An alternative format is shown in the example below.
Knapper and Cropley (1991: p. 44) believe that the willingness of adults to learn is
affected by their attitudes, values and self-image and that their capacity to learn depends
greatly on their study skills.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Note that in this example reference has been made to a specific point within a very long text (in
this instance a book) and so a page number has been added. This gives the reader the opportunity
to find the particular place in the text where the point referred to is made. You should always
include the page number when you include a passage of direct quotation from another writer's
work.
When a publication has several authors, it is usual to give the surname of the first author
followed by et al. (an abbreviation of the Latin for 'and the others') although for works with just
two authors both names may be given, as in the example above.
Do not forget that you should also include reference to the source of any tables of data, diagrams
or maps that you include in your work. If you have included a straight copy of a table or figure,
then it is usual to add a reference to the table or figure caption thus:
Figure 1: The continuum of influences on learning (from Knapper and Cropley, 1991: p.
43).
Even if you have reorganised a table of data, or redrawn a figure, you should still acknowledge
its source:
Table 1: Type of work entered by humanities graduates (data from Lyon, 1992: Table
8.5).
You may need to cite an unpublished idea or discussion point from an oral presentation, such as
a lecture. The format for the text citation is normally exactly the same as for a published work
and should give the speaker's name and the date of the presentation.
Recent research on the origins of early man has challenged the views expressed in many
of the standard textbooks (Barker, 1996).
If the idea or information that you wish to cite has been told to you personally, perhaps in a
discussion with a lecturer or a tutor, it is normal to reference the point as shown in the example
below.
The experience of the Student Learning Centre at Leicester is that many students are
anxious to improve their writing skills, and are keen to seek help and guidance (Maria
Lorenzini, pers. comm.).
'Pers. comm.' stands for personal communication; no further information is usually required.
2. Reference lists/ bibliographies
When using the 'author, date' system, the brief references included in the text must be followed
up with full publication details, usually as an alphabetical reference list or bibliography at the
end of your piece of work. The examples given below are used to indicate the main principles.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Book references
The simplest format for a book reference is given first; it is the full reference for one of the
works quoted in the examples above.
Knapper, C.K. and Cropley, A. 1991: Lifelong Learning and Higher Education. London:
Croom Helm.
The reference above includes:
The surnames and forenames or initials of both the authors
The date of publication
The book title
The place of publication
The name of the publisher.
The title of the book should be formatted to distinguish it from the other details; in the example
above it is italicised, but it could be in bold, underlined or in inverted commas. When multiauthored works have been quoted, it is important to include the names of all the authors, even
when the text reference used was et al.
Papers or articles within an edited book
A reference to a paper or article within an edited book should in addition include:
The editor and the title of the book
The first and last page numbers of the article or paper.
Lyon, E.S. 1992: Humanities graduates in the labour market. In H. Eggins (ed.), Arts
Graduates, their Skills and their Employment. London: The Falmer Press, pp. 123-143.
Journal articles
Journal articles must also include:
The name and volume number of the journal
The first and last page numbers of the article.
The publisher and place of publication are not normally required for journals.
Pask, G. 1979: Styles and strategies of learning. British Journal of Educational
Psychology, 46, pp. 128-148.
Note that in the last two references above, it is the book title and the journal name that are
italicised, not the title of the paper or article. The name highlighted should always be the name
under which the work will have been filed on the library shelves or referenced in any
indexing system. It is often the name which is written on the spine of the volume, and if you
remember this it may be easier for you to remember which is the appropriate title to highlight.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Other types of publications
The three examples above cover the most common publication types. You may also wish to refer
to other types of publications, including PhD dissertations, translated works, newspaper articles,
dictionary or encyclopaedia entries or legal or historical texts. The same general principles apply
to the referencing of all published sources, but for specific conventions consult your
departmental handbook or your tutor
.
Referencing web pages
The internet is increasingly used as a source of information and it is just as important to
reference internet sources as it is to reference printed sources. Information on the internet
changes rapidly and web pages move or are sometimes inaccessible meaning it can often be
difficult to validate or even find information cited from the internet.
When referencing web pages it is helpful to include details that will help other people check or
follow up the information. A suggested format is to include the author of the information (this
may be an individual, group or organisation), the date the page was put on the internet (most web
pages have a date at the bottom of the page), the title, the http:// address, and the date you
accessed the web page (in case the information has been subsequently modified). A format for
referencing web pages is given below.
University of Leicester Standing Committee of Deans (6/8/2002) Internet code of
practice and guide to legislation.
Accessed 8/8/02 http://www.le.ac.uk/committees/deans/codecode.html
Referencing lectures
Full references to unpublished oral presentations, such as lectures, usually include the speaker's
name, the date of the lecture, the name of the lecture or of the lecture series, and the location:
Barker, G. 1996 (7 October): The Archaeology of Europe, Lecture 1. University of
Leicester.
Please note that in contrast to the format used for the published sources given in the first three
examples above, the formatting of references for unpublished sources does not include italics, as
there is no publication title to highlight.
Formatting references
If you look carefully at all the examples of full references given above, you will see that there is
a consistency in the ways in which punctuation and capitalisation have been used. There are
many other ways in which references can be formatted – look at the books and articles you read
for other examples and at any guidelines in your course handbooks. The only rule governing
formatting is the rule of consistency.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

How to reference using footnotes or endnotes
Some academic disciplines prefer to use footnotes (notes at the foot of the page) or endnotes
(notes at the end of the work) to reference their writing. Although this method differs in style
from the 'author, date' system, its purpose (to acknowledge the source of ideas, data or quotations
without undue interruption to the flow of the writing) is the same.
Footnote or endnote markers, usually a sequential series of numbers either in brackets or slightly
above the line of writing or printing (superscript), are placed at the appropriate point in the text.
This is normally where you would insert the author and date if you were using the 'author, date'
system described above.
Employers are not just looking for high academic achievement and have identified
competencies that distinguish the high performers from the average graduate.¹ This view
has been supported by an early study that demonstrated that graduates employed in the
industrial and commercial sectors were as likely to have lower second and third class
degrees as firsts and upper seconds.²
Full details of the reference are then given at the bottom of the relevant page or, if endnotes are
preferred, in numerical order at the end of the writing. Rules for the formatting of the detailed
references follow the same principles as for the reference lists for the 'author, date' system.
1. Moore, K. 1992: National Westminster Bank plc. In H. Eggins (ed.), Arts Graduates,
their Skills and their Employment. London: The Falmer Press, pp. 24-26.
2. Kelsall, R.K., Poole, A. and Kuhn, A. 1970: Six Years After. Sheffield: Higher Education
Research Unit, Sheffield University, p. 40.
NB. The reference to 'p.40' at the end of note 2 above implies that the specific point referred to is
to be found on page 40 of the book referenced.
If the same source needs to be referred to several times, on second or subsequent occasions, a
shortened reference may be used.
Studies of women's employment patterns have demonstrated the relationship between
marital status and employment sector. ³ ------------------------3. Kelsall et al. 1970 (as n.2 above).
In this example, the footnote refers the reader to the full reference to be found in footnote 2.
In some academic disciplines, footnotes and endnotes are not only used for references, but also
to contain elaborations or explanations of points made in the main text. If you are unsure about
how to use footnotes or endnotes in your work, consult your departmental guidelines or personal
tutor.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Finally
Whichever referencing system you use, you should check carefully to make sure that:
You have included in your reference list/bibliography, footnotes or endnotes full details
of all the sources referred to in your text
You have used punctuation and text formatting, such as italics, capitals, and bold text, in
a consistent manner in your reference lists or footnotes.
Further reading
More detailed discussion of referencing conventions is to be found in the following publications:
Berry, R. 2004: The Research Project: How to Write It. London and New York:
Routledge.
Gash, S. 1999: Effective Literature Searching for Students (second edition). Aldershot:
Gower.
Gibaldi, J. 2004: MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers (sixth edition). New
York: The Modern Language Association of America.
Watson, G. 1987: Writing a Thesis: a Guide to Long Essays and Dissertations. London:
Longman.
The Harvard referencing manual.
The Vancouver referencing guide.
There are also software programmes, for example, Endnote and Refworks that are designed to
manage references. They include the facility to incorporate 'author, date' insertions within your
text, and to format reference lists automatically.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

USING PARAGRAPHS
This guide explains how to make effective use of paragraphs in your writing. The function and
features of a paragraph are explained, together with guidelines for using paragraphs to create a
clear and coherent written structure.
What is a paragraph?
Writing of any length requires subdivision into a number of points or stages, and these stages are
expressed in a paragraph. Paragraphs, whether denoted by a new line and an indentation or a line
break, provide a structure for your writing. The end of a paragraph represents a significant pause
in the flow of the writing. This pause is a signpost to the reader, indicating that the writing is
about to move on to a different stage. Each paragraph should deal with one idea or aspect of an
idea, and it should be clear to the reader what this main idea is.
How long should a paragraph be?
There is no absolute rule: very short or long paragraphs can work when used by an experienced
writer. However, as a guideline, paragraphs should usually be no less than two or three sentences
long and there should be two or three paragraphs per page of A4.
The length of a paragraph depends on the idea being treated, but if a paragraph is shorter than
two or three sentences, check to see if it is not really part of the previous or next paragraph. If
your paragraph is longer than half a page, check to see if the idea would be better explained in
two or more paragraphs.
When do I start a new paragraph?
Start a new paragraph for each new point or stage in your writing. When you begin a paragraph
you should always be aware of the main idea being expressed in that paragraph. Be alert to
digressions or details that belong either in a different paragraph or need a paragraph of their own.
How do I write a paragraph?
A paragraph can have an internal structure with an introduction, main body and conclusion in
the same way as an essay. It is a useful rule always to have three stages in a paragraph:
introduction, development and conclusion.
The introduction
The introduction makes the purpose of the paragraph clear so the reader can read the paragraph
with this purpose in mind. It is usually necessary to show the place the paragraph has in the
structure of the piece as a whole. This can be done with just a word (Nevertheless, However,
Furthermore) or it may need a phrase (Another point to consider is....). In an essay, this might
mean showing how the main idea of the paragraph answers the essay question. In some cases
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

when the paragraph begins a new section, it may be necessary to write a separate paragraph that
explains how the following section relates to the piece as a whole.
The development
The body of the paragraph should develop the idea that has been introduced at the beginning of
the paragraph. This can be done by:
Redefining the idea;
Giving examples;
Commenting on evidence;
Showing implications or consequences;
Examining opposing ideas.
The conclusion
The end of the paragraph can show the significance of the point, link back to the beginning of the
paragraph, comment on the implications of the point as a whole, or make a link to the next
paragraph. It is important not to end the paragraph with a digression or irrelevant detail. Each
sentence in the paragraph should be part of the internal structure.
Summary
Paragraphs provide a structure for your writing which enables the reader to identify and
follow the developing stages in your treatment of the material. Remember that paragraphs
should have their own internal structure whilst fitting into the larger structure of the whole
piece of writing.
Be clear what the main idea for each paragraph is, deal with it as fully as is necessary for
your purpose, but be alert to digression or irrelevancies.
Check your own use of paragraphs by reading the first sentence to see if it outlines the
paragraph's main idea. The effective use of paragraphs can be seen in writing when the reader
can gain an overview of the content by reading the first sentence of each paragraph.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

USING THE COMMA
Why use commas?
Commas are used to divide or separate parts of a sentence in order to make the meaning clear
and the sentence easier to read. They mark a brief pause in the sentence, usually at a point where
you would naturally pause if you were speaking rather than writing. They may be used to
separate individual words or phrases within the sentence. Some examples of the main types of
usage are given below.
Using commas to separate items in a list
Commas are used to separate the individual words or phrases that together make up a list.
The fish kept in the ponds were eels, tench, pike, perch and carp.
The main reasons for the closure were low enrolment, poor learning material, staff
recruitment problems and inadequate funds.
Note that a comma is not normally used before the last item in the list, unless it is needed for
clarification.
The choices were History and Archaeology, Archaeology and Sociology, and Ancient
History.
Here, a comma is used before the last item in the list to avoid confusion.
Separating the parts of a sentence
Commas are used to separate an introductory word or phrase from the main sentence, or to
separate a word or phrase that briefly interrupts the flow of the sentence. In the examples below,
the introductory and interrupting words or phrases have been italicised.
Nevertheless, many critics see value in this theory.
After the first decade, the changes were fully integrated into the system.
Numerous studies, however, prove that the theory is inaccurate.
The same theory, according to most writers, can be applied to language acquisition.
Similarly, commas are used to separate an afterthought or a final phrase that contrasts with the
main part of the sentence.
The war was vitally important for Europe, far more than it was for Britain.
To understand a particular culture we must look at the whole of society, not just its
individual parts.
A single sentence can, of course, use commas in more than one way. To use the comma
effectively, avoid overuse as this can make the sentence difficult to read and understand. Use the
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

comma purposefully, as shown in the example above, and re-read a longer sentence to check the
pauses are in the most helpful places.
Using commas to link simple sentences
A series of short, simple sentences can be jerky and tedious to read.
The University is large. It is close to the town centre. There are special rooms available.
Advance reservation is necessary.
A way of improving the flow of the writing is to link sentences with a comma together with a
linking word (a co-ordinating conjunction) such as and, but, so, or, nor or yet.
The University is large, and it is close to the town centre. There are special rooms
available, but advance reservation is necessary.
Warning!
A comma cannot be used on its own to join two sentences. A comma only indicates a pause in a
sentence; it cannot join sentences without the addition of a co-ordinating conjunction. For
example, these two sentences, whilst grammatically correct, would read better if joined.
The people followed their own creed. They were willing to die for it.
However, they cannot be joined by using a comma on its own, as the comma shows only a pause,
not a link.
The people followed their own creed, they were willing to die for it.
A comma together with a co-ordinating conjunction joins the sentences correctly.
The people followed their own creed, and they were willing to die for it.
Sentences can sometimes be joined effectively using a semi-colon (;).
Summary
If in doubt about your use of commas, read each sentence aloud, pausing briefly at each comma.
If the sentence flows badly and seems jerky, you probably have too many commas. If you are
breathless by the time you have reached the end of the sentence, you might need to insert some
commas at appropriate points as shown in this guide. It may even be necessary to divide a very
long sentence into two or more separate sentences.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

USING THE SEMI-COLON AND COLON
This guide has been written to give a simple explanation of the use of the semi-colon (;) and
colon (:). It explains how they can be used effectively and gives examples of their main uses.
THE SEMI-COLON
The semi-colon represents a break within a sentence that is stronger than a comma, but less final
than a full stop. It enables the writer to avoid over use of the comma and preserves the finality of
the full stop. Semi-colons are used to separate items in a list and to link closely related sentences.
To separate items in a list
Use the semi-colon to separate items in a list when one or more items contains a comma. (These
examples use a colon to introduce items in the list. An explanation of the use of the colon is
given below.)
The speakers were: Dr Sally Meadows, Biology; Dr Fred Eliot, Animal Welfare; Ms
Gerri Taylor, Sociology; and Prof. Julie Briggs, Chemistry.
The four venues will be: Middleton Hall, Manchester; Highton House, Liverpool;
Marsden Hall, Leeds; and the Ashton Centre, Sheffield.
The main points in favour of the system were that it would save time for buying, accounts
and on-site staff; it would be welcome by the reception staff; it would use fewer
resources; and it would be compatible with earlier systems.
To link sentences which are closely related
Closely related sentences are often linked to emphasise their relationship and to vary the pace of
the writing.
For example: I read the book in one evening. It was not very helpful.
One way to link these sentences is with a comma and a word such as and, or, but, nor, for, so, yet
(called coordinating conjunctions). I read the book in one evening, but it was not very helpful.
For variety in sentence structure, the semi-colon can be used to link closely related sentences
instead of a coordinating conjunction and comma. I read the book in one evening; it was not
very helpful.
The semi-colon tells the reader that the second clause is closely linked to the first clause. Note
how sentences joined in this way are similar in either theme or grammatical structure as shown in
the examples below.
Personal writing utilises the first person form; impersonal writing utilises the third
person form.
He was nervous about giving the speech; he asked for water several times.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

The deadline has come forward a week; everyone's help will be needed. For use with
otherwise, however, therefore…
The semi-colon can be used to link sentences that also use words such as otherwise, however,
therefore, as connectors. These connectors (known as conjunctive adverbs) also include
moreover, nevertheless, thus, besides, accordingly, consequently, instead, hence.
I did not finish reading the text; instead, I watched the news.
(Notice that the connecting word instead is followed by a comma.)
The research is far from conclusive; nevertheless, it has some value in this case.
Dr Suptri argues that the research shows an increase in such occurrences; however,
many experts would dispute this.
THE COLON
The colon acts as a pause that introduces related information. It indicates that the reader should
look forward to information that follows on from the earlier statement. Some of the main ways a
colon can be used are shown below.
To introduce a list
The colon can be used to introduce the items in a list.
Topics discussed will include: the structure of viruses, virus families and current
concerns in virology.
Students joining the department undertake to: attend all lectures and tutorials, meet
deadlines for written work and contribute to tutorials and seminars
To introduce an explanation, conclusion or amplification
The colon can also be used to introduce an explanation, conclusion or amplification of an earlier
statement. The use of the colon separates and highlights the second statement, showing that it
follows on from the first.
Tai chi is more than a form of physical exercise: it is meditation in movement.
After extensive research, the committee came to its conclusion: development could not
take place without further funding.
Summary
The semi-colon and colon are often underused, yet their correct use can enhance the
clarity of your writing.
Beware of an over dependence on the comma and full stop, as this can make for
ambiguous and repetitive sentence structure.
Look in your writing for opportunities to use the semi-colon and colon in the ways
described in this guide.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

USING THE APOSTROPHE
This guide has been written to give a simple explanation of the use of the apostrophe (’). It
explains the main rules for its use, and gives examples of commonly encountered problems.
The apostrophe has two main uses
1. It replaces missing letters when we join words e.g. I can't swim. This is known as a
contraction.
2. It shows ownership e.g. this is John’s book.
Contractions
When contractions are used, the apostrophe replaces the letter or letters that were removed to
make a shorter word: For example: do not becomes don’t. The apostrophe replaces the missing
letter, in this case the ‘o’.
Further examples:
I will becomes I’ll
you are becomes you’re
they are becomes they’re
Whilst it is important to understand the function of contractions, their use is not usually
appropriate in academic writing.
Ownership
Apostrophes are also used to show ownership – they make a word possessive. To make a word
possessive follow the three simple rules given below.
1. If the word is singular add ’s : the student’s books – meaning the books belonging to the
student. Further examples: the boss’s armchair; the government’s legislation.
2. If the word is a plural but does not end in ‘s’ add ’s : women’s rights – meaning the
rights of women. Further examples: children’s playground – meaning the playground for
children; men’s changing rooms – meaning the changing rooms for men.
3. If the word is plural and ends in ‘s’ just add an apostrophe: the students’ library books –
meaning the books belonging to the students. Further examples: the ladies’ football
league; the workers’ rights.
Common problems in using apostrophes
The apostrophe is frequently misused. Words that cause particular problems are: its / it’s and
whose / who’s.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Use its when you want to show possession: the government abandoned its policy. Its belongs to
a group of words that are already possessive. Other examples are: it is hers; it is yours. These
words are already possessive; they do not need apostrophes to indicate possession.
Use it’s when you want to shorten it is: it’s a nice day. It’s is a contraction of it is . The
apostrophe replaces the missing ‘i’.
Use whose when you want to show possession: the student whose notes I borrowed. Whose
belongs to the same group of possessive words as its. It does not need an apostrophe to denote
possession.
Use who’s when you want to shorten who is: the student who’s coming to visit. Who’s is a
contraction of who is. The apostrophe replaces the missing ‘i’.
REMEMBER:
Just because a word ends in s, it does not mean it needs an apostrophe! An apostrophe is added to
show possession or to replace a missing letter or letters in contractions. If you are unsure
when to use an apostrophe, check if your use of the apostrophe falls under one of the rules
outlined in this guide.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

THE ART OF EDITING
Introduction
When you start to produce a piece of written work, you are likely to be aware of various targets
and standards that you need to work to, such as:
The stipulated word limit;
The required level of academic writing;
The need to present material in a clear and logical order; and
The necessary high standards in spelling, referencing, and grammar.
However, if you become too concerned at this stage about the required standard of the end
product, you may feel reluctant to begin writing at all. This is why making a clear separation
between the processes of writing and editing can be helpful.
Brookes and Marshall (2004 p213) suggest it is usually more helpful to produce something
imperfect, then revise it, than to waste time trying to produce something that is perfect first time
round. The following table describes how writing can be a relatively free and expansive process;
while editing can take care of the critical attention and refinement that will ensure your writing
reaches the required standard.
Writing May Involve
Creating
Including
Presenting
Recording
Feeling closely involved
An immediate, but naïve product
Making a mess

Editing May Involve
Critiquing
Adding and removing
Improving
Reviewing
Feeling fairly objective
A subsequent, refined product
Tidying it up later

What is editing?
Editing refers to the broad intellectual task of raising the overall academic standard of a piece of
writing, via an iterative process of critique and revision. It uses the term proof reading to refer
to the narrower job of checking such elements as spelling, grammar, and page numbering.
Detailed proof reading is usually best done as the last stage in the editing process.
This table shows some typical aspects of writing that you can critique within the editing process.
The overall logical structure and balance of the thesis
The coherence of the line of argument
Adherence to your stated title / research question / plans
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Use of active / passive voice, and of past / present tense
Signposting and linking of content clarity of explanation
Appropriate content under appropriate headings
Length of sentences, and economy of word use
The examiner will be able to tell how much attention you have paid to the editing process. He or
she will not appreciate reading material that has clearly not been thoroughly edited. If the
reader’s main response is irritation at a poorly edited thesis, this will make it less likely that he or
she will develop a positive impression of the content of your writing. It is better that you spot
and make the improvements necessary, than that the examiner is the first to spot them.
Positive and negative feelings about editing
Students can experience a range of feelings as they approach the task of editing their thesis. For
some, editing can feel like a negative experience, after the relatively creative and positive
process of writing:
Perhaps you have already spent such a lot of effort writing, that it feels impossible to
improve on what you’ve done, even though you know it probably does need improving.
Perhaps you face the task of reducing the total number of words by 30%, and can’t see
how you can do this without losing crucial material.
Perhaps you are tired of looking at your writing, and the thought of studying it again
closely for the editing process makes you want to run away.
For others, editing can feel more positive than writing, because they know that this is a stage
where they can really raise the standard of their work. Some positive points about editing are:
If you are thinking about editing your work, it means that you must already have written
something reasonably substantial.
Editing tends to be a highly constructive process. Every single useful change you make is
a guaranteed step towards improving the quality of your thesis.
It tends to be much easier to criticise and improve on your writing, than it was to produce
the writing in the first place.
It can therefore be relatively quick to produce significant improvements within the
editing stage.
Where to work?
One way of separating the processes of writing and editing is to do them in different places. Print
out your writing, so that you can do the editing work on hard copy, away from the computer e.g.:
on the train or bus; in a café; on a park seat; somewhere else well away from the work
environment; or at your desk if you prefer.

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Printing the work out and working on hard copy can help you feel as if you are reviewing
someone else’s writing. This is useful, as it is important not to get too attached to any particular
parts of your writing: “Until a manuscript is in print, not a word you have written is
sacrosanct.” (Wolcott 2001 p112).
Some people do choose to edit while sitting at a computer, but it is still important to print the
work out at some point in the editing process, as only then will you see the reality of “the density
of the ink, the sharpness of the printing … Fonts, size of type, headings, spaces and blocks of text
all may look different when you are holding a piece of paper in your hands rather than staring at
a screen” (Brookes and Marshall 2004 p219).
Recording your critique
When you are editing away from the computer, it is important to make full notes of any
improvements that occur to you. They may seem obvious at the time, but it is disappointing
when you come to make the alterations later on, to find you have forgotten the seemingly perfect
re-phrasing you had thought of earlier; or that you can’t read the scrawl you made in the margin.
So, make sure you record your suggested modifications very clearly, so you can follow them
easily when you type in the alterations at a later time.
Overall editing plan
Effective editing will invariably require a number of sweeps through the work, and a series of
drafts. An example of an editing plan is provided below. It may be tempting to work paragraph
by paragraph, trying to perfect each one before attending to the next. This is, however, neither an
efficient nor an effective method for editing a large document. Several of the processes, e.g.:
maintaining a logical thread throughout; and identifying duplication; require more of an
overview to be taken, involving review at a chapter or thesis level, rather than at a sentence or
paragraph level.
DRAFTS:
AIMS:
Draft 1
Editing for academic i.
rigour

Draft 2

Reducing
redundancy

Draft 3

Editing for
consistency

TECHNIQUES
Check that you have explicitly written down what
you intended to do, and what you did in your
research, rather than just having it in your head
ii. Ensure you have a clear, logical thread running
throughout
iii. Back up all claims and interpretations
Identify and remove unnecessary duplication, explanation
and interesting but irrelevant material. Un-clutter the
language used
Check consistent use of tenses, voice, style

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Draft 4

Signposting and
linking

Let the reader know what to expect, and summarise what
has just been read. It is then easier for the reader to
establish a structure into which your research can be
understood

Draft 5

Proof reading

Check details for spelling, grammar,

Draft 1: Editing for academic rigour
This relates to the essence of academic writing. It needs to be your main editing focus. And will
take the most time. Academic journals publish the criteria they use to evaluate articles, and these
can be useful in guiding the process. There may also be detailed guidance available within your
own department. This section describes three aspects to editing for academic rigour, which
should help you to work through this process using a structured approach.
Firstly, on a broad level, it can be very helpful to ask these two deceptively simple questions:
‘What did I try to do and did I do it?’
‘What am I trying to say, and do I say it?’
Each of these questions is in two parts. The first part asks what you are trying to do, and the
second asks whether you consider you did it. Both parts of each question are essential.
What did I try to do and did I do it?
You may not need to prove that you did everything that you intended to, but you do need to show
that you are clear about what you intended to do, and that you are fully aware of how your
eventual research related to your initial plans, and why there may be some discrepancies.
Addressing this question closely and thoroughly will take you through a review of the rationale
for your research; the methods chosen; how they were employed; and a critique of how things
went.
What am I trying to say, and do I say it?
When you are deeply involved in your research, and know about it in great detail, it can be very
easy to think that you have explained something, only to find that important, and basic, elements
of the explanation are missing. So, while it is important to ask What am I trying to say? It is
essential to add Do I say it? and to be highly critical when reading through your writing to check
that you do actually state clearly what you are trying to say, rather than leaving the reader to fill
in gaps.
Secondly, you need to ensure that you have provided a well-supported and clear thread of logical
reasoning throughout your thesis. You need to check that your sections are arranged in an order
that will present your reasoning most effectively. Take a step back from your detailed writing,
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

and create an outline of a straightforward, logical structure you could use for your thesis. An
effective way to do this is to explain aloud, to a friend, or alone but using a tape recorder, in as
logical and clear a way as possible:
The overall reason for your research;
What you did; and
What you found.
If your friend takes notes, or if you tape-record the explanation, you can use the record to
produce a coherent outline for your structure. Then read through your writing thus far, and
produce an outline of the structure that you have actually used. By comparing the two structures
you can identify:
Where the ordering is confusing;
Where you have written too much or too little;
Where new sections are needed; and
Where others can be swapped around.
Thirdly, you need to attend to the reader’s ever-present question: “Why should I believe this?”
Ideally, you will be able to adopt the role of an awkward reader of your own writing. The aim is
to make sure that all the claims you make are either supported or removed. If you can read your
own work with a provocative and questioning attitude, it will help you to identify the places
where you need to provide more evidence for your statements and interpretations.
Draft 2: Reducing redundancy; simplifying and shortening
Some parts of your writing may be true, interesting, and well-written but, if they do not strictly
form part of the main thread or ‘story’ of the writing, it is better to remove them. You may have
spent time describing an aspect of context, theory, practice, or experience that you now decide is
not directly relevant to your main argument or research study. However attached you feel to that
bit of writing, you do need to be ruthless in removing it.
This is good practice in all academic writing, but is particularly useful when you need to reduce
your number of words. Initially it is best not to think too much about word limits. Later however,
as you edit, you will see many examples of redundancy where you can remove words, phrases,
paragraphs, and even whole sections, to improve the coherence and logical flow of your writing.
If you worry about losing material that you might want to bring back, you can keep it
temporarily in a reserve file, rather than delete it completely.
You can also reduce the number of words by simplifying the language used, as in this table from
Barrass (1978 pp 61 & 70-72).

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Long Version
on a regular basis
if at all possible
during the month of April
an increased appetite was manifested by all the rats
during the time that
conduct an investigation into
has an ability to
on two separate occasions
which goes under the name of
it may well be that
take into consideration
it was observed in the course of the demonstration that

Shorter Version
regularly
if possible
in April
all the rats ate more
while
investigate
can
twice
is called
perhaps
consider
we observed that

Another way to reduce redundancy, and to increase clarity, is to write in the active rather than
the passive tense e.g.:
The box was opened by the experimenter becomes
The experimenter opened the box
A reduction from 7 to 5 words; and an increase in clarity.
Similarly:
It was decided that the order in which the questions were asked should be changed could
become
I decided to change the order of the questions
A reduction from 15 to 9; and an increase in clarity.
This second example introduces the question of whether it is acceptable to use the voice of the
researcher in the first person i.e.: how acceptable is it to say “I did …”? It is essential to seek
advice within your academic field about this. It may even be possible to ascertain the views of
your particular thesis examiner.
It is becoming more acceptable to write in the first person, particularly in the social sciences. A
general guide is to use the third person routinely but, where there is a decision to explain, it is
acceptable to take clear responsibility for that decision by using the first person at that point.
This can be demonstrated with the example of giving details of a methodology. It would read
awkwardly if every element were to be described in the first person e.g.:
I set up the apparatus, then I prepared the recording sheet. I added the first element then
I waited for it … etc etc.
However, it is more acceptable to write about specific decisions in the first person e.g.:
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

The weather was colder than anticipated, so I decided to focus the data collection on the
hours around mid-day.
Styles are changing in this area, and they currently vary across disciplines, so it is important to
check preferences in your own field regarding the balance between use of the first and third
person.
Draft 3: Editing for consistency
A thesis is a large document, written over time, so it is almost inevitable that problems may
occur with consistency. The kinds of elements to review for consistency are:
Consistent use of the third person rather than the first person, except in places where you
have specifically decided to use a different voice;
Consistent use of one tense throughout a section, unless there is a specific reason to
change;
Consistent use and formatting of headings and sub-headings;
A reasonable (not necessarily equal) balance in the lengths of sections;
Consistent use of either bullet points or numbering for lists;
Consistency in referencing style;
Consistency in labelling and numbering appendices, tables, diagrams, figures, photos,
and other items.
Draft 4: Signposting and linking
Signposting and linking are particularly important in a long document such as a thesis. The
reader has a lot of information to take in, and is unlikely to read the whole document in one go. It
is in your own interest to help the reader construct and maintain a coherent picture of the
research you are describing.
Typical wording for signposting:
In this chapter, the method will be described in detail. The chapter begins with a
description of the physical setting in which the data were collected. It then describes the
process of recruitment to the study. Each element of the experiment is described in turn,
and illustrated using a typical participant journey. Copies of the letters, information
sheets, and consent forms used are included in Appendix F. The chapter ends with a
description of …
Signposting is helpful in the Introduction and at the beginning of chapters. It allows the
reader to prepare a structure in his or her own mind, into which can be placed the material that is
then read. It reduces the chance that the reader will wonder why you seem to have missed
something out, only to find it is included in an unexpected place. It also helps the reader to
appreciate the logical flow of your writing.
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Linking is used to guide the reader through different sections or paragraphs, so that the
logical structure of your writing is highlighted. Creating and inserting appropriate links is a
useful test of the logical structure of your writing. If you find it straightforward to insert links, it
suggests that your writing is logically and coherently ordered. If you find it more difficult, it
could be a sign that you need to re-think some of the ordering.
Typical wording for links:
In the previous chapter I described …. In this chapter I will ….
The argument just presented is the main one used by theorists in this field. The next
sections describe three other related arguments that could be used to extend it.
This is the background as far as the providers were concerned. The next section explores
the background from the users’ perspective.
Each of these links looks both backwards and forwards, thereby both reviewing what has just
been said, and introducing what is about to be said. It is easy to feel that, by using links like
these, you are wasting words. Ironically, by using these ‘extra’ words, you are actually
employing a very efficient method of streamlining and structuring your content.
Editing to increase the number of words
In the editing process you may identify certain sections of your writing that are relatively brief
and superficial, and which you consider need to be extended. Techniques you can use are:
Taking the idea contained within one sentence, and developing it into a whole paragraph;
Increasing the amount of comment as opposed to pure description;
Being more generous with the signposting, linking, and summaries;
Asking the questions ‘so what?’ and ‘why should i believe this?’, then providing the extra
rationale that is needed;
Thinking further through the implications of your research for e.g.: theory; practice;
research;
Thinking further about how the research could have been done better.
It is vital that the words you add enhance the academic quality of the thesis, rather than simply
fill the space. Having space to increase the number of words is an excellent and relatively rare
opportunity to read your work from the examiner’s viewpoint, then to be able to add in further
explanation where this seems necessary.
Editing fatigue
There may come a point at which you feel that you have lost the critical eye you need to review
your writing. It is important to recognise when this happens. There is little point in continuing to
edit that piece of work if you are losing your sense of judgment. When this happens you can put
Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

it aside to look at it yourself a few days later. Editing is best done is a series of short, focussed
efforts, rather than attempting a long, sustained effort.
Draft 5: Proof reading
Proof reading is the last stage in the editing process. It needs to be done thoroughly and
systematically, otherwise it is very easy to miss details that need to be changed. Here are five
suggestions to feed into a proof reading strategy.
1. Take a structured approach: focus in turn on specific potential problems, rather than
trying to identify everything at one go.
2. Make your proof reading relevant to your own writing. Look through some previous
writing that has been marked, and make a list of your own typical errors, then use this to
form the basis of your proof reading strategy.
3. Examples of common problems are:
faulty abbreviations duplication of words spelling errors
too much space between two words
missing or misplaced apostrophes
inappropriate changes of tense
singular and plural mixed up inaccurate cross-referencing of pages
leaving a reference in the list, when it has been removed from the text
4. Check referencing format in detail: it must be appropriate, accurate, and consistent.
5. Final check of tables; figures; diagrams; page numbering; contents list; appendices; and
all the references to any of these within the text.
References
Barrass R. (1978) Scientists must write. Chapman & Hall: London.
Brookes I. and Marshall D. (2004) Good writing guide. Chambers: Edinburgh.
Wolcott H. (2001) Writing up qualitative research. 2nd Edition. Sage: Thousand Oaks.
Guidance
The Writing Centre. University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill at www.unc.edu/depts/wcweb

Source: Learning Development at the University of Leicester.
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

