CRITICAL READING SKILLS:
Page 2
Page 6
Page 8
Page 9
Page 18

-

Critical Reading
Improving Your Reading Skills
Increasing Your Reading Speed
Note-Making
Thought Mapping

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

CRITICAL READING:
What is critical reading?
Critical reading is an important precursor to critical writing. The most characteristic features of
critical reading are that you will:
Examine the evidence or arguments presented;
Check out any influences on the evidence or arguments;
Check out the limitations of study design or focus;
Examine the interpretations made; and
Decide to what extent you are prepared to accept the authors’ arguments, opinions, or
conclusions.
Why do we need to take a critical approach to reading?
Regardless of how objective, technical, or scientific the subject matter, the author(s) will have
made many decisions during the research and writing process, and each of these decisions is a
potential topic for examination and debate, rather than for blind acceptance. You need to be
prepared to step into the academic debate and to make your own evaluation of how much you are
willing to accept what you read.
A practical starting point therefore, is to consider anything you read not as fact, but as the
argument of the writer. Taking this starting point you will be ready to engage in critical reading.
Critical reading does not have to be all negative
The aim of critical reading is not to find fault, but to assess the strength of the evidence and the
argument. It is just as useful to conclude that a study, or an article, presents very strong evidence
and a well-reasoned argument, as it is to identify the studies or articles that are weak.
Evidence
Depending on the kind of writing it is, and the discipline in which it sits, different kinds of
evidence will be presented for you to examine.
At the technical and scientific end of the spectrum, relevant evidence may include information
on: measurements, timing, equipment, control of extraneous factors, and careful following of
standard procedures. Specific guidance will be available within specialties on what to look for.
At the other end of the spectrum is writing where there is clearer scope for personal
interpretation, for example:
Analysis of individuals’ experiences of healthcare;
The translation of a text from a foreign language; or
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

The identification and analysis of a range of themes in a novel.
In these cases the evidence may include items such as quotes from interviews, extracts of text,
and diagrams showing how themes might connect. The nature of the evidence presented at these
two extremes is different, but in both cases you need to look for the rationale for the selection
and interpretation of the evidence presented, and the rationale for the construction of the
argument.
Broadening the definition of evidence
All that you read can be considered as evidence, not purely the actual data collected/presented.
This encompasses:
The report of the context within which the data were collected or created;
The choice of the method for data collection or selection;
The audit trail for the analysis of the data i.e.: the decisions made and the steps in the
analysis process;
The rationale for the interpretations made and the conclusions drawn;
The relevance of, and the use made of the theoretical perspective, ideology, or philosophy
that is underpinning the argument.
Linking evidence to argument
On its own, evidence cannot contribute to academic debate. The interpretation and presentation
of that evidence within an argument allows the evidence to make a contribution. The term
‘argument’ in this context means the carefully constructed rationale for the enquiry, and for the
place of its results within the academic arena. It will explain for example:
Why the authors considered that what they did was worth doing;
Why it was worth doing in that particular way;
Why the data collected, or the material selected, were the most appropriate;
How the conclusions drawn link to the wider context of their enquiry.
Even in the most technical and scientific disciplines, the presentation of argument will always
involve elements that can be examined and questioned. For example, you could ask:
Why did the writer select that particular topic of enquiry in the first place?
Why did the writer decide to use that particular methodology, choose that specific
method, and conduct the work in that way?
Why did the writer select that particular process of analysis?

NOTE TAKING
As you read, it can be helpful to use a table to record the information that you know you will
need later. In addition to the usual bibliographical details, you can devise your own list of extra
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

information you want to collect at the initial reading stage. Some suggestions are given below.
Two important points about using such tables are:
It is essential that you devise your own list of information to collect from each source,
based on what you know you will need to comment upon; and
Realistically, it is probably best not to try to collect this information from every single
source you use, only from those you decide to refer to in your report or assignment.
Otherwise it could really slow down your background reading, and result in the collection
of a mass of material that you never use.
Descriptive details you may want to record about sources:
Setting type of data
Sample size use of theory
Sample profile equipment
Follow up style of writing
Statistics used measurements
Methods sources of bias
Questions raised limitations
Main arguments intended audience
Some interpretative questions you may need to ask about sources
These are questions that need more input from you as the critical reader. You will need to make
judgements about your answers, and will need to record the reasons for your answers. This list is
a mix of arts and science-based questions, as there are several areas of common interest.
Q How well-developed are the themes or arguments?
Q Did the theoretical perspective used introduce any potential bias?
Q Are you convinced by the interpretations presented?
Q Are the conclusions supported firmly by the preceding argument?
Q How appropriate are the comparisons that are used?
Q Did the response options, or measurement categories or techniques used affect the data that
were collected?
Q Have any ethical considerations been adequately addressed?
If you take a critical approach right from the start of your reading and note taking, it can save a
lot of time later on. When you come to write your assignment or thesis, you will need to
comment on the validity of the writing that you refer to. So, if you have kept a systematic record
of the results of your critical reading, you will be able to refer to it easily. If you have not, you
will find yourself wasting a lot of time re-reading material, and re-reviewing the evidence
presented.
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Helpful guidance from other sources
There are many sources of guidance on how to engage in critical reading: some are in books on
general study skills; others are on the internet. Chapter 10 of the ‘Study Skills Handbook’ by
Stella Cottrell (2003) Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, is particularly recommended. The
following questions are based on material from that chapter:
nclusions drawn based on only a few examples?

allow readers to draw their own conclusions?

Guidance available via the internet can be found on the following websites
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) - http://www.casp-uk.net/
This site is designed for use within healthcare, but many of the ideas are transferable
more widely in both quantitative and qualitative research.
University of Toronto: Advice on critical reading for academic writing http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/advice/reading-and-researching
This site has many useful sections on styles of academic writing.
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute: Center for Communication Practices http://www.ccp.rpi.edu/resources/critiques/
This site has a useful e-handout on writing critiques.

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

IMPROVING YOUR READING SKILLS
Improving your reading skills will reduce unnecessary reading time and enable you to read in a
more focused and selective manner. You will also be able to increase your levels of
understanding and concentration. This guide shows you how to read with greater efficiency and
effectiveness by using a range of different reading skills.
Reading for study
You already use a range of reading styles in everyday situations. The normal reading style that
you might use for reading a novel is to read in detail, focusing on every word in sequence from
start to finish. If it is a magazine you are reading, you might flick through the pages to see which
articles are of interest. When you look in a telephone directory for a particular name, you
purposefully ignore all other entries and focus your attention on spotting the name you want.
These everyday reading skills can be applied to your studies. To improve your reading skills you
need to:
ave clear reading goals;
hoose the right texts;
se the right reading style;
se note taking techniques.
Reading goals
Clear reading goals can significantly increase your reading efficiency. Not everything in print
will be of use to you. Use reading goals to select and prioritise information according to the task
in hand. Reading goals can be:
An essay or seminar subject;
A report brief;
A selected subject area;
A series of questions about a specific topic.
Use your reading goals to help you identify the information that is relevant to your current task.
Choosing a text
You will need to assess the text to see if it contains information that is relevant to your reading
goals.
Check the date of publication. Is the information up-to-date?
Read the publisher's blurb at the back or inside sleeve for an overview of the content.
Check the contents page for relevant chapters.
Look up references for your topic in the index. If the text does not seem relevant, discard
it.
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Once you have selected a text you can use the following techniques of scanning and skimming to
help you identify areas for detailed reading.
Scanning:
Scanning is the technique you might use when reading a telephone directory. You pass your
vision speedily over a section of text in order to find particular words or phrases that are relevant
to your current task. You can scan:
The introduction or preface of a text;
The first or last paragraphs of chapters;
The concluding or summarising chapter of a text;
The book index.
Skimming:
Skimming is the process of speedy reading for general meaning. Let your eyes skip over
sentences or phrases which contain detail. Concentrate on identifying the central or main points.
Use this technique to:
re-view a selection of text prior to detailed reading;
efresh your understanding of a selection of text following detailed reading.
Detailed reading and note taking:
Once you have selected useful information, you can begin to read in detail. Note taking
techniques provide a useful aid to reading. Use:
Underlining and highlighting to pick out what seem to you the most central or
important words and phrases. Do this in your own copy of texts or on photocopies - never
on borrowed texts;
Keywords to record the main headings as you read. Use one or two keywords for each
main point. Keywords can be used when you don't want to mark the text;
Questions to encourage you to take an active approach to your reading. Record your
questions as you read. They can also be used as prompts for follow up work;
Summaries to check you have understood what you have read. Pause after a section of
text and put what you have read in your own words. Skim over the text to check the
accuracy of your summary, filling in any significant gaps.
These techniques encourage an active engagement with the text as well as providing you with a
useful record of your reading. Avoid passively reading large amounts of text, it does not make
effective use of your time. Always use a note taking technique to increase your levels of
concentration and understanding.

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

INCREASING YOUR READING SPEED
It is more important to improve your reading skills than your reading speed. Being focused and
selective in your reading habits will reduce the time you spend reading. If, in addition to using a
range of reading skills you want to increase your reading speed, then the following technique
will be of use.
The average reading speed is about 240-300 words per minute. For the average reader, the eye
fixes on each word individually.
It is easy for your eye to recognise 4 or 5 words in a single fixation without a loss of
understanding. The key to increasing your reading speed is not to increase the speed at which
your eyes move across the page, but to increase the word span for a single fixation. A simple
way of developing the habit of taking in more than one word per fixation is to take a page of text
and divide it length ways into three with two lines drawn down the page. Using a pen or pencil as
a pointer, read each line of text by allowing your eye to fall only in the middle of each of the
three sections, as indicated by your pointer.
Developing your reading speed
Don't worry about how quickly you are reading but instead, concentrate on reading the
line in only three fixations.
As this becomes more natural, practise without drawing lines.
Later, reduce the number of fixations to two per line.
Once this increased word span becomes a comfortable habit, an increase in your reading
speed will occur.
Have a clear focus for your reading. Set your reading goals.
Survey the text before you spend the time and effort involved in detailed reading.
Scan and skim to select the text for detailed reading.
Scan and skim after detailed reading to reinforce your understanding.
Use a form of note taking whilst reading in detail, to keep you concentrating, aid
understanding and provide you with a record of your reading.
Using clear reading goals and a variety of reading skills is more important than increasing
your reading speed.
To improve your reading speed, don't increase the speed of the eye across the page, but
increase the number of words the eye recognises in a single fixation.

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

NOTE-MAKING
Note-making is a fundamental academic activity. Note-making is right at the heart of academic
study. As a student, you will make notes when you:
ttend lectures or seminars
ead to support your writing of essays, reports, dissertations, and theses
Note-making is fundamental to these activities. Note-making: a significant challenge! There are
many situations, however, in which note-making can be a real challenge, for example if:
The content of the lecture is predominantly factual and you want to try to record all of the
facts but the lecturer is going through it really quickly
You make notes from masses of background reading, but are then stuck with how to use
it all
You make lots of notes for a piece of writing, but then worry about how to avoid
accidentally plagiarising, as you remember which ideas were your own and which were
from existing sources
You find reading academic papers and books quite slow, and feel that you miss out on the
overall sense of an article because you spend too much time writing detailed notes as you
read through it
Differences between note-making in lectures and when reading
You may have a set of lecture slides in front of you, but you will still need to make your own
notes in lectures. Extra slides may be added; and the lecturer will invariably offer more
explanation and examples than appear on the slides. You will also want to record any ideas or
queries of your own that you have during the lecture.
The big difference between note-making in lectures and note-making from reading is the lack of
control that the student has over the process, because lectures happen in real time. This means
that:
…when note-making in lectures:
You can’t pause the lecturer; rewind; then replay; to go over something
If you are reminded of some information you want to look up, you have to make a note
and remember to follow it up later
You can’t slow the lecturer down if you fall behind in your note-taking
…but while note-making from reading:
You can easily stop and read something again if you need to
if you are reminded of some information you want to look up, you may be able to do it
straightaway
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

you can read and make notes at the best pace for you, to make sure your notes are
complete
A good way of appreciating the importance of good note-making is to spend five minutes trying
to answer the following question:
If you tried to write an assignment or dissertation without doing any background reading
and associated notemaking, what might it be missing?
Try to build up a list of at least ten elements that could be missing from your writing if you did
no background reading and note-making at all!
Note-making from reading
Risk-taking
You cannot avoid taking risks when you take notes! The risks tend to relate to note-making that
is too detailed, and to note-making that is too brief. You need to decide where to place yourself
along this continuum of risk.
Being too brief: To avoid making masses of notes that you may not actually use, you decide to
write down the minimum
The risk: You fail to record crucial material, and have to go back to the source and read it again
Being too comprehensive: You decide to write down every piece of information that may
possibly be relevant
The risk: Your reading takes far too long; you end up with masses of notes; you
most
relevant; and you run out of time to do your writing
Managing the risk by being selective
Being selective is the key to successful note-making. There are two main levels at which you
need to be selective:
Deciding what to read and what not to read
Deciding which specific material to make notes on
Deciding what to read and what not to read Information that may help you decide is:
The year of publication: how up to date is the information in relation to your specific
topic?
The contents page and index: are there specific sections devoted to your topic of interest?
The abstract, introduction, or preface: they should help you to decide whether to read
more
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Beginnings and ends of promising sections: do they suggest that the content is worth
reading in more detail?
Deciding which specific material to make notes on – some useful questions:
Do you really need this information? If so, which bits?
Will you really use it? When, and how?
Have you noted similar information already?
What questions do you want to answer with this information?”
Cottrell S. (2003 p.126) The study skills handbook 2nd edition. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan Mantex has a website offering resources to support learning development, and has
this advice:
Some people take so many notes that they don’t know which to use when it’s time to do
the writing. They feel that they are drowning in a sea of information. This problem is
usually caused by two common weaknesses in note-taking technique:
o Transcribing too much of the original
o Being unselective in the choice of topics
There are two possible solutions to this problem:
Select only those few words of the source material which will be of use. Avoid being
descriptive. Think more, and write less. Be rigorously selective.
Keep the project topic or the essay question more clearly in mind. Take notes only on
those issues which are directly relevant to the subject in question.
Don’t be pushed along by the literature: approach it with a plan! Take the analogy of visiting a
supermarket to buy food for a party. If you simply wander in to see what there is, and buy
anything that looks nice, you will probably end up back home wondering:
Why you bought far too many puddings and cakes
How you will be able to make use of that huge quantity of fruit and vegetables, before
they go bad
Why you bought masses of drinks of all kinds (although there are just 20 people coming),
but you forgot to buy any extra coffee
How much money you have just wasted on stuff you don’t need
How much better it would have been if you had started off with a list
Translating this image onto the academic practice of note-making, you will see that wandering
into a text and simply writing down everything that looks interesting is neither an efficient nor an
effective approach. A plan is needed.

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

This table gives some suggestions for how to begin your planning. It uses the idea of going food
shopping for a party as an analogy for reading for an assignment.
Buying food for a party

Reading for an assignment

Start by deciding what the food theme will be, Start by taking a close and critical look at
so that you can work out what you need
your assignment title, to see what is needed
Create a list of the all the kinds of food and
drink you need to look for when you go to the
supermarket

Create a list of the kinds of information,
examples, ideas etc that you will be looking
for in your reading

At the supermarket you may be distracted by
all the other fantastic food and drink for sale.
Keep referring to your list and be cautious! It
is easy to waste money buying drinks that
look wonderful but you know will not be used
or food that may be a good idea, if you had
more time to prepare it

As you begin to read you may be distracted
by interesting material that you want to make
notes on, but which is not relevant to the
specific task at hand. Keep referring to your
assignment title and to your plan. Do not be
tempted by interesting but irrelevant material

When you find food that is on your list, assess Assess the relevance of those articles and
its quality and price, and buy the best
books you choose to read, and make notes
specimens
when you find material that is directly
relevant to your assignment
Sometimes you can find an idea that is not on
your list, but which would actually be perfect
for your party. Yes, buy it!

Sometimes you come across material that you
hadn’t anticipated, but which would be great
to include. Yes! Make notes on it, and revise
your plan

Keeping to this plan should save you time and money, and give you a great party as well.
Keeping to this plan should you time and effort, and should streamline the actual assignment
writing process
Note-making templates
Using a note-making template can help you to:
Make notes in a clear and readable format
Remember the kind of information you want to record from each source
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Standardise your notes so you can find particular elements again more easily when you
come to use them.
When you have decided that a source is going to be useful and you are going to make notes on it,
you need to record the full referencing details. After that there are various headings under which
you may want to make notes. Here are some ideas of the kinds of headings you might choose to
use:
Main purpose of text suggested future research
Problem(s) encountered
Study population method(s) used
Useful case study useful example(s) main argument(s) useful material to quote
Idea(s) you can use
Supporting evidence for your argument
Particular relevance to my assignment
Limitation(s) main finding(s) geographical / political setting
Writing style + examples
Context theory useful statistics justification for the research
This website gives you outlines of five designs of note-making system:
http://www.sas.calpoly.edu/asc/ssl/notetakingsystems.html
One or more of these systems may suit you. If not, you may be able to modify one of them, or
combine two or more, into a personal system that works for you.
You can also devise your own template, using the kind of headings listed in the table above that
are the most appropriate to your own discipline and topic, so that:
Instead of wandering into the literature and feeling overwhelmed by it, you
Take control before you engage with the literature, and go in with your “shopping list”
already prepared
Avoiding Plagiarism
Plagiarism is using the words or ideas of someone else as if they were your own. Universities
consider plagiarism to be a serious offence, and you need to take great care to avoid it.
Unfortunately, it is relatively to find yourself in danger of plagiarising another’s work even
though you have no intention of doing so. The two main risks within the note-making process
are:
Paraphrasing too closely when you are making your initial notes; and
Copying some material verbatim, then being careless about using inverted commas)
around the precise sections you have copied
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

When you find some detailed material that is highly relevant, it can be a good idea to copy it
verbatim, using inverted commas, and recording the page number. You can then make a decision
about how to use the material at the point of writing; by using the direct quote, or by
paraphrasing it in your own words at that point.
Note-making in lectures
The particular challenges presented by trying to make notes in lectures are:
You have no control over the speed at which the lecturer talks, so there may be some time
pressure on your notemaking
You cannot pause and go over some information again, like you can when you are
reading
You may not be able to identify until later, which elements of the lecture were the most
important to make notes about
You can keep more control over the situation if you devise ways of streamlining your notemaking practice.
Streamlining your note-making in lectures
There are several ways in which you can increase the efficiency of your note-making. This has
the benefits that:
You can spend less time writing, and more time listening and thinking
Your notes will be easier to read when you come back to them
Your notes will already contain some structure for you when you come to use them for an
assignment or for revision
A lot of the guidance on note-making in lectures seems to hold an idealistic view of what
students can routinely manage to attain. The following suggestions are from the usually realistic
and helpful Stella Cottrell (2003 p138).
Before the lecture:
Get a feel for the subject. Read (or just flick through) a book on the subject of the lecture.
Look for themes, issues, topics and headings. Look up any technical words you don’t
understand.
Write down questions you want answered. Leave space to write the answers under each
question either during or after the lecture.
Jot down your own opinion. Notice if it changes during the lecture.
Glance through your notes for the previous lecture and look for links with the next
lecture.
She also advises that, after the lecture, you:
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Label and file your lecture notes and any handouts.
Read through your notes. Fill in details from your reading or research.
Discuss the lecture with others. Compare notes and fill in any gaps.
If you can get into one or more of these work habits then great! However, if you find you cannot
use this advice, don’t feel like a failure. The suggestions below can take you a long way towards
efficient and effective note-making in lectures. They focus on shortcuts to speed up your note
writing, so that you can keep up with understanding the lectures, and come out at the end with
clear and informative notes.
Shortcuts for note-making in lectures
Have pens of different colours available, so you can use them to underline notes for
particular reasons e.g.: to denote:
o something you need to follow up because you didn’t fully understand it
o a key criticism
o the main explanation
o a recommended reference
o connected ideas
o Establish a collection of abbreviations so you can speed up your note-making e.g.:
o could and would become cd and wd
o evidence in support/against becomes ev+/evo strength/weakness becomes Sg/Wk
Create a collection of codes for yourself using symbols such as * ☼ ¦ » **, and attach
your own meaning to them. The idea is to use these symbols to refer to common concepts
within your discipline, so that you just have to jot down the symbol rather than write out
the full word or sentence. There is useful list of widely used codes in Cottrell (2003 p.
130)
Leave plenty of space around your notes so you can read them more easily later, and so
that you can add further thoughts, or extra information that comes later in the lecture
It may be possible to anticipate the general content/format of a lecture, in which case you
may be able to prepare a table in advance for some of your notes, into which you can add
detail during the lecture e.g.: if you know your lecturer will be listing examples, case
studies, or experiments and commenting on them, you could create a table.
Use plenty of headings and sub-headings, and numerical lists, to introduce structure into
your notes
Use key words in the margin, to summarise each section
Final comments

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Note-making certainly presents challenges. It is better to be prepared, and to have strategies in
place, than it is to wander casually into the literature, or into a lecture, and spend the rest of the
time feeling left behind by the lecturer, or overwhelmed by all the reading.
For the best results, you need to design your own method of taking more control over your notemaking, informed by the ideas of others, so that it fits well with your own working style.
Examples of specific information you may want to collect when you are making notes
Comprehensive background information
Evidence-based justification for your research
Context e.g.: legal, social, geographical, historical, political, scientific, practice,
Published statistics
Evidence to support your argument
Evidence to challenge your argument
Examples of disagreements in the field
Suggestions by others for further research
The recommendations of others in your field
Useful references to follow up
Limitations in the arguments of others
Main findings from the research of others
Limitations of previous research methods
Useful case studies
Useful literatures reviews
Examples of translating theory into practice
Interesting links to the practical work of others
How effectively different methods have been employed elsewhere
How ethical issues have been considered and handled by others
The populations and samples used by other researchers in this field
Problems encountered by others, and how they handled them
By thinking about what precisely you are looking for when you read and make notes, you can
become more efficient and effective at that process. Recording your own thought about what you
are reading as well as making notes of what others have said and done, you will have your own
ideas as you read. Sometimes these ideas can flash quickly and you may lose them if you don’t
write them down immediately. It can be useful, therefore, to build some space into your notemaking templates, where you can make a note of your own reactions and ideas as you read.
Examples of the kinds of thoughts and ideas you may want to record are:
A query about something, that you want to check out
An idea about a possible link
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

A different interpretation from the one you have just read
An additional example you have thought of to illustrate an idea
A useful order in which you could incorporate some material into your argument
A reference to follow up
An idea for some research to suggest
Some limitations that you want to point out
Some questions that your reading is raising in your mind
Particular statistics that you need to look up
An idea about how to structure your writing

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

THOUGHT MAPPING
This guide gives you a step by step introduction to a note making technique called thought
mapping. This non-linear technique provides you with a note making tool that encourages active
thinking and creativity. It can help you to create plans, increase recall and save time in a wide
range of study tasks.
What is a non-linear technique?
Written information is most commonly presented to us in a linear format, i.e. sentences and
phrases going left to right down a page. A non-linear format breaks away from this norm,
making freer use of space and symbols. Varieties of this format include flow charts, spider
diagrams and thought maps.
Why use a non-linear technique?
Non-linear techniques can provide a powerful graphic tool which uses word, image, number,
logic, colour and spatial awareness.
It can give you an overview of a large subject or topic area.
It can gather and hold large amounts of data.
It encourages active planning techniques by allowing you to see links and make
It is visually stimulating and aids concentration.
Introducing thought maps
This particular technique uses keywords grouped around a central topic in a hierarchical
structure. You will be shown how to:
Read a thought map
Make a thought map
Apply thought mapping to your own studies.
Reading a thought map
A thought map uses keywords to represent points. This enables you to make the best use of space
and to record a lot of information on just one page.

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

To read this thought map:
Start in the centre where the subject is shown
Read the keywords that connect to the centre. These are the topic headings or main
themes of the subject
Read each branch from the centre outwards. Each branch lists the points under each
heading or theme.
Notice that some main headings divide into subheadings with three different points under
each subheading.
A thought map presents the key aspects of information in an ordered format that provides a clear
overview of the material.
Making a thought map
The following guidelines show you the three steps to making a thought map that is well
organised and easy to read.
STEP ONE
Use blank paper, turned sideways (landscape).
Start in the centre with an image and/or word that represents the topic of your thought
map.
Choose the keywords or images that will represent your main themes and put each one on
a line that is connected to your topic in the centre.
The best keywords are the ones that use your own personal associations to link the
keyword to the point it represents.
Thought mapping can be applied to a variety of study tasks including planning, note making,
organising and exams. Plans for dissertations, reports, presentations, projects and essays can be
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

made with a thought map. It can be applied to note taking tasks in lectures, seminars and with
texts, as well as with note making tasks such as brainstorming ideas, making initial plans for
work or recording your own thoughts and ideas.
When tackling exams this technique can be made use of in revision for condensing, reviewing
and recalling material. It provides a quick way of practising exam answers, allowing you to
rehearse ideas, try out plans and test your recall.
Finally thought mapping can help with organisation skills, enabling you to overview your
thoughts, manage your time and order everyday tasks.
STEP TWO
Branch off from the main themes with points represented by keywords or images.
Put each word or image on its own line.
Make each line the same length as the word or image.
Words and images are larger in the centre and smaller further out.
Keep the lines thicker in the centre, thinning out towards the edges of your thought map.
This helps to show the order of your material.
STEP THREE
Add more levels of thought as necessary.
Use colour to categorise your information and make the thought map visually
stimulating. Use three or more colours for the central image and then use a different
colour for each branch.
Use symbols and images in place of keywords to represent a point concisely, or in
addition to keywords to reinforce a point and aid recall.
Keep your thought map clear and add levels of order by enclosing grouped branches,
using numbers and showing links with arrows.
Once you are familiar with these guidelines, you can adapt the technique to your own particular
needs. Develop your own personal style of thought mapping to make the best use of your own
personal associations and thought processes.
Using thought maps
Use thought maps to plan essays, reports and presentations:
Label points in your linear notes with a keyword for each point in the margin;
Try out structures for your essay or report by using the keywords to create thought maps;
Try out a variety of structures in thought map form until you find the plan which shows
the best order for your material.
Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

Use a thought map in all note making tasks:
It can be used to brainstorm your initial ideas on a topic, essay or presentation;
It is a quick and efficient technique for making notes from texts and other written
sources;
It can be incorporated into your lecture notes to make your note taking an active process
and to help you remember information;
It can be used in seminars and tutorials to quickly record ideas and points that may arise.
Use thought maps in revision:
Create an overview of a topic or subject area using a thought map;
Condense notes into a form that is easier to remember;
Test your recall by recreating from memory a thought map of your notes. The visual
image of the thought map will help you remember the information;
Practise planning exam answers by using a thought map. It will help you to order your
ideas and make links and connections.
Use thought maps to organise your time:
Thought maps make effective 'to do' lists. They provide an overview which enables you
to see what is a priority.
Use colour to highlight or numbers to order important tasks;
Before beginning a task use a thought map to make an action plan of what needs to be
done;
Organise your thoughts or ideas by making a thought map on a particular topic or issue.
The structure of a thought map enables you to add new thoughts and ideas as they occur
whilst the connecting nature of the map encourages active thinking processes.

Source:
© Student Learning Development, University of Leicester
studyhelp@le.ac.uk | www.le.ac.uk/succeedinyourstudies

