                                          FALLACIES
What is a fallacy?
         There are two ways in which an argument can fail. Firstly, if one of its premisses
asserts a false proposition, the argument will fail to establish the truth of the conclusion,
even if the reasoning involved is correct. Secondly, the premisses of an argument may in
fact fail to support the conclusion. In both these instances we could say that the argument
is fallacious. As the term fallacy is employed in logic, however, “it designates not any
mistaken inference or false belief, but typical errors, that is, mistakes, that arise
commonly in ordinary discourse, and that devastate the arguments in which they
appear.”1 Copi and Cohen elaborate:

        There are many ways in which reasoning can go astray; that is, there are many
        kinds of mistakes in argument. It is customary to reserve the term “fallacy” for
        arguments that, although incorrect, are psychologically persuasive. Some
        arguments are so obviously incorrect as to deceive and persuade no one. But
        fallacies are dangerous because most of us are, at one time or another, fooled by
        some of them. we therefore define a fallacy as a type of argument that may
        seem to be correct, but that proves, on examination, not to be so. It is
        profitable to study these mistaken arguments because the traps they set can best
        be avoided when they are well understood. To be forewarned is to be forearmed.2

       Following Copi and Cohen, we will consider various fallacies under two main
headings: fallacies of relevance and fallacies of ambiguity.

Fallacies of relevance

        When an argument relies on premisses that are not relevant to its conclusion
        and that therefore cannot possibly establish its truth, the fallacy committed is
        one of relevance.3

Often the premisses are psychologically relevant to the conclusion and so can give the
impression to the unwary that they are logically relevant. Hence the seeming correctness
and persuasiveness of fallacies of relevance.

The argument from ignorance: argument ad ignorantiam
       In an argument from ignorance “it is argued that a proposition is true simply
on the basis that it has not been proved false, or that it is false because it has not
been proved true.”4 A little reflection, however, leads us to see that our inability to
prove the truth or falsehood of a proposition does not mean that it is either false or true.



1
  Irving M. Copi and Carl Cohen, Introduction to Logic (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1998), 114.
2
  Ibid., 115.
3
  Ibid., 116.
4
  Ibid.


                                                    1
         Famous in the history of science is the argument ad ignorantiam given in
         criticism of Galileo, when he showed leading astronomers of his time the
         mountains and valleys on the moon that could be seen through his telescope.
         Some scholars of that age, absolutely convinced that the moon was a perfect
         sphere … argue against Galileo that, although we see what appear to be
         mountains and valleys, the moon is in fact a perfect sphere, because all its
         apparent irregularities are filled in by an invisible crystalline substance. And this
         could not prove false! Legend has it that Galileo, to expose the argument ad
         ignorantiam, offered another of the same kind as a caricature. Unable to prove the
         nonexistence of the transparent crystal supposedly filling the valleys, he put
         forward the equally probable hypothesis that there were, rearing up from the
         invisible crystalline envelope on the moon, even greater mountain peaks – but
         made of crystal and thus invisible! And this hypothesis, he pointed out, his critics
         could not prove false.5

The appeal to inappropriate authority: argument ad verecundiam
       It is entirely appropriate to rely on the authority of experts in particular areas in
which we ourselves possess no great competence. There is no problem with invoking
such authority. A problem arises, and so the fallacy ad verecundiam, “when the appeal
is made to parties having no legitimate claim to authority in the matter at hand.”6
Thus, explain Copi and Cohen

         [I]n an argument about morality, an appeal to the opinions of Darwin, a towering
         authority in biology, would be fallacious, as would be an appeal to the opinions of
         a great artist, like Picasso, to settle an economic dispute. But care must be taken in
         determining whose authority is reasonably to be relied on, and whose rejected.
         While Picasso was not an economist, his judgment might plausibly be given some
         weight in a dispute pertaining to the economic value of an artistic masterpiece.7

        The most blatant examples of inappropriate appeal to authority are probably to be
found in advertisements. Thus, for example, we are encouraged to buy a particular brand
of car because a football star recommends it; we are exhorted to consume a particular
kind of food or beverage because a movie star endorses it. As Copi and Cohen put it,
“Wherever the truth of some proposition is asserted on the basis of the authority of one
who has no special competence in that sphere, the appeal to misplaced authority is the
fallacy committed.”8
        In practical terms, we should always ask ourselves whether the person whom we
are inclined to cite as an authority really does have the authority we would like to ascribe
to him/her and whether that authority is greater than our own in the matter. It is of course
always possible that a person who does have a claim to legitimate authority might offer
an opinion that subsequently proves to be wrong. To invoke such authority before the
opinion is proved wrong is not however to be guilty of an argument ad verecundiam.

5
  Ibid., 117.
6
  Ibid., 119.
7
  Ibid.
8
  Ibid.


                                               2
Complex question
       One of the most frequent fallacies is the complex question which consists in
“asking a question in such a way as to presuppose the truth of some conclusion
buried in the question.”9 By asking a question in this way, the questioner can often
achieve his or her purposes surreptitiously – albeit also fallaciously.

        Thus an executive of a utility company may ask, “Why is the private development
        of resources so much more efficient than any government-owned enterprise?” –
        assuming the greater efficiency of the private sector. Or a homeowner may ask,
        regarding a proposed increased in the property tax, “How can you expect the
        majority of voters, who rent but don’t own property and don’t have to pay tax, to
        care if the tax burden of others is made even more unfair?” – assuming that the
        burden of the proposed tax is unfair, and that those who rent rather than own their
        own homes are not affected by tax increases on property. But since these
        assumptions are not openly asserted, the questioners evade the need to defend
        them forthrightly.10

Copi and Cohen offer a dialogue that illustrates the most explicit form a complex
question takes: one party asks a complex question, a second party answers it, and the first
party then draws a fallacious inference on the basis of the answer:

        LAWYER: The figures seem to indicate that your sales increased as a result of the
        misleading advertisements. Is that correct?
        WITNES: They did not!
        LAWYER: But you have to admit, then, that your advertising was misleading.
        How long have you been engaging in practices like these?11

       It is possible to combine a complex question with an appeal to ignorance, as in the
following passage from a scientific journal:

        If Dr. Frankenstein must go on producing his biological monsters … [h]ow can
        we be sure what would happen once the little beasts escaped from the
        laboratory?12

These kind of fallacious attacks are difficult to deal with as the require that the person to
whom they are directed sort out hidden assumptions before a rational response is
possible.

Argument ad hominem
        Literally an argument ad hominem means an argument “against the person.” it is
“a fallacious attack in which the thrust is directed, not at a conclusion, but at the


9
  Ibid., 120.
10
   Ibid. 120-21.
11
   Ibid., 121.
12
   Erwin Chargaff, in a letter to Science 192 (1976), 938. Quoted in Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 122.


                                                    3
person who asserts or defends it.”13 There are two major ways in which this fallacy is
committed.

A. Argument ad hominem, abusive
    In arguments one often hears one party attack the intelligence, reasonableness,
integrity, and so on of their interlocutor. The fact is, however, that a person’s character is
irrelevant to the soundness of the argument he or she is making. To say, for example, that
a proposal should be rejected because it is proposed by “radicals” or “extremists” is a
typical example of an ad hominem argument.
    Unfortunately, this kind of argument can all too often be persuasive because of its
psychological effects on those listening. When listeners are not sufficiently critical, their
emotions can be mobilized in favour of or against a particular point of view.
    Even philosophers have been known to commit this kind of fallacy as the following
passages illustrate:

     It is one thing to be attacked by an honorable opponent in an honorable way. This
     happens all the time in philosophy. But in my view Sommer’s intellectual methods
     are dishonest. She ignores the most elementary protocols of philosophical
     discussion.14

Sommers, in turn, replies:

        One dishonest and unworthy tactic used by several of my detractors is to attribute
        to me complaints I never made and then to dismiss the “complaints” as
        “irresponsible” and evidence of my reckless unfairness.15

       Labels often encountered in ad hominem arguments include: “right wing,” “left
wing,” “liberal,” “conservative,” “fundamentalist,” and so on.

B. Argument ad hominem, circumstantial
        In the circumstantial form of the ad hominem fallacy, the one committing the
fallacy focuses on the circumstances of his or her opponent. The circumstances of one
who makes a claim have no bearing on the truth or otherwise of the claim itself.

        In one of the varieties of this form, it is argued fallaciously that consistency
        obliges an opponent to accept (or reject) some conclusion merely because of that
        person’s employment, or nationality, or political affiliation, or other
        circumstances. It may be unfairly suggested that a clergyman must accept a given
        proposition because its denial would be incompatible with the Scriptures. Or it
        may be claimed that political candidates must support a given policy because that
        policy is explicitly propounded in the platform of their party. Such argument is

13
   Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 122.
14
   Sandra Lee Bartky, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Association 65 (1992), 56. Copi and
Cohen, ibid.
15
   Christina Sommers, Proceedings of the American Association 65 (1992), 79. Quoted in Copi and Cohen,
Introduction, 123.


                                                  4
           irrelevant to the truth of the proposition in question; it simply urges that some
           persons’ circumstances require its acceptance.

        Clearly the circumstantial form of the ad hominem argument is a special case of
the abuse form. Thus, for example, to accuse someone of inconsistency in making a
particular argument because of his or her profession or religious creed is a form of abuse.
Likewise, to give another example, to say that someone’s argument is untrustworthy
because he or she belongs to a particular group is a form of abuse.

Accident and converse accident
        The fallacies of accident and converse accident involve the use of generalization.
“When we apply a generalization to individual cases that it does not properly
govern, we commit the fallacy of accident. When we doe the reverse and, carelessly or
by design, apply a principle that is true of a particular case to the great run of cases,
we commit the fallacy of converse accident.”16
        We would all agree that it is wrong to deceive. But what about someone, say
Fritz, in Nazi Germany who was harbouring Jews in order to protect and save them?
Some Gestapo officers knock at the door and ask if there are any Jews in hiding there.
What should Fritz reply? Should he really tell them the truth that there are Jews in hiding
in the basement? Hardly. This would be a fallacy of accident, moving to quickly or
carelessly from a generalization.
        The fallacy of converse accident involves moving too quickly or carelessly to a
generalization. We are all familiar with the way in which all too often generalizations are
made about groups of people on the basis of what may be true about a small minority,
perhaps only one or two, people who belong to a particular group. In the Western world
one might perhaps encounter someone who has been smoking heavily for a long number
of years without suffering what are the usual consequences of this harmful and disgusting
habit. Such a person might say: “Smoking is not bad for you. Look, I’ve been smoking
thirty cigarettes a day for the last twenty-five years and have had no serious health issues
as a result.” One cannot move from an isolated exceptional case like this one to a
generalized comment.

False cause
       This fallacy involves treating something as the cause of something else when
in reality it is not the cause. The most common form this fallacy takes is when it is
believed that one thing is cause by another simply because if follows it. Temporal
succession is no proof of causal succession.

           If an aggressive move in foreign policy is followed by an international event for
           which we had been hoping, some may mistakenly conclude that the aggressive
           policy was the cause of that event. In primitive beliefs, the error is sometimes
           blatant; we will all reject as absurd the claim that beating drums is the cause of the
           sun’s reappearance after an eclipse, despite the evidence offered that ever time
           drums have been beaten during an eclipse, the sun has reappeared.17

16
     Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 125.
17
     Ibid., 126.


                                                 5
The fallacy of false cause is widely known as the fallacy of post hoc ergo propter hoc
(“after a thing therefore because of a thing”).

Begging the question: petitio principii
         Begging the question or the fallacy of petitio principii consists in assuming the
truth of what one seeks to prove. This mistake would seem to be quite a silly one, yet it
can be obscured by the way in which the premisses of the argument are formulated. The
following argument illustrates the fallacy in operation: “To allow every man unbounded
freedom of speech must always be, on the whole, advantageous to the state; for it is
highly conducive to the interests of the community that each individual should enjoy a
liberty, perfectly unlimited, of expressing his sentiments.”18 Another example: “All of us
cannot be famous, because all of us cannot be well known.”19

The appeal to emotion: argument ad populum
       The argument ad populum is a favoured device of propagandists and those with
tyrannical inclinations. “It is fallacious because it replaces the laborious task of
presenting evidence and rational argument with expressive language and other
devices calculated to excite enthusiasm, excitement, anger, or hate.”20 Historically,
the speeches of Adolph Hitler are potent examples of the argument ad populum.

        Those who rely most heavily of arguments ad populum are now to be found in
        advertising agencies, where the use of that fallacy has been elevated almost to the
        status of a fine art. The products advertised are associated, explicitly or slyly, with
        things that we yearn for or that excite us favorably. Breakfast cereal is associated
        with trim youthfulness, athletic prowess, and vibrant good health; whiskey is
        associated with luxury and achievement, and been with high adventure; the
        automobile is associated with romance, riches and sex. The men depicted using
        the advertised product are generally handsome and distinguished, the women
        sophisticated and charming – or hardly dressed at all. So clever and persistent are
        the ballyhoo artists of our time that we are all influenced in some degree in spite
        of our resolution to resist. Almost every imaginable device may be used to
        command our attention, even to penetrate our subconscious thoughts. We are
        manipulated by relentless appeals to emotion of every kind.21

The mere association of a product and the emotion is in itself not an argument. The
argument ad populum lies deeper. The implicit argument is that we ought to buy some
article or other because it is associated with wealth or power or because everyone else is
buying it.




18
   Richard Whately, Elements of Logic (London, 1826). Quoted in Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 127.
19
   Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 132.
20
   Ibid., 128.
21
   Ibid.


                                                  6
The appeal to pity: argument ad misericordiam
      The appeal to pity is in effect a special case of the appeal to emotion. In the
argument ad misericordiam the emotions to which appeal is made are altruism and
mercy. Thus,

        The attorney for a plaintiff, seeking compensatory damages for an injury, often
        arranges to have the client’s disability revealed in the courtroom in some
        heartrending way. And in criminal trials, although jury sympathy has no bearing
        whatever on the guilt or innocence of the accused, effective defense attorneys
        often appeal to the pity of the jury to the extent that the circumstances allow.
        Sometimes that appeal is made obliquely.22

Socrates, at his trial in Athens, resolutely refuses to appeal to pity in his defense. He will
not bring his children into the courtroom to evoke pity in his favour. He says:

        I, who am probably in danger of my life, will do none of these things. The
        contrast may occur to his [each juror’s] mind, and he may be set against me, and
        vote in anger because he is displeased at me on this account. Now if there be such
        a person among you – mind, I do not say that there is – to him I may fairly rely:
        My friend, I am a man, and like other men, a creature of flesh and blood, and not
        “of wood or stone” as Homer says; and I have a family, yes, and sons, O
        Athenians, three in number, one almost a man, and two others who are still
        young; and yet I will not bring any of them here to petition you for acquittal.23

The appeal to force: argument ad baculum
        The appeal to force is obviously a fallacy that it seems to require no discussion at
all. Sometimes, however, appeals ad baculum (literally “to the stick”) can be employed
quite subtly. The threat involved may be indirect or veiled. Consider the following words
from Howard Baker at the opening of one meeting:

        The President continues to have confidence in the Attorney General and I have
        confidence in the Attorney General and you ought to have confidence in the
        Attorney General, because we work for the President and because that’s the way
        things are. And if anyone has a different view of that, or any different motive,
        ambition, or intention, he can tell me about it because we’re going to have to
        discuss your status.24

Appeal to force constitutes the abandonment of reason and is unacceptable.




22
   Ibid., 129.
23
   Plato, Apology.
24
   “White House Orders Silence on Meese,” Washington Post, 29 April 1988.


                                                  7
Irrelevant conclusion: ignoratio elenchi
        The fallacy of ignoratio elenchi occurs “when an argument purporting to
establish a particular conclusion is instead directed to proving a different
conclusion.”25 For example

        [P]articular tax reforms are sometimes defended by an emphasis on the need to
        reduce budget deficits – when the real issue is the fairness or yield of the specific
        tax measure proposed. Or special programs proposed to support the building
        industry, or the automobile industry, may be defended with premisses that show
        the need for assistance but do not support the need for the kind or amount of
        assistance the program at issue would provide.26

        While every fallacy (with the exception of petitio principii) is in a sense an
ignoratio elenchi, in the sense in which it is referred to here it denotes a fallacy in which
the argument misses the point without necessarily committing any of the other fallacies.
        The term non sequitur is often applied to a fallacy of relevance (again with the
exception of those that commit a petitio principii). It mean that the conclusion does not
follows from its premiss or premisses. Consider the following example:

        “Veterans have always had a strong voice in our government,” he said all too
        accurately, adding the non sequitur: “It’s time to give them the recognition they so
        rightly deserve.”

Fallacies of ambiguity
Arguments of ambiguity contain ambiguous words or phrases whose meaning shifts in
the course of the argument, thereby rendering the argument fallacious.

Equivocation
        Many words have more than one meaning and we have no difficulty
distinguishing those meanings on the basis of the context in which they are used. “When
we confuse the several meanings of a word or phrase – accidentally or deliberately –
we are using the word equivocally. If we do that in the context of an argument, we
commit the fallacy of equivocation.”27 Equivocation can be employed in a humorous
way as in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass. Take, for example, the following
passage:

        “Who did you pass on the road?” the King went on, holding his hand out to the
        messenger for some hay.
              “Nobody,” said the messenger.
              “Quite right,” said the King; “this young lady saw him too. So of course
        Nobody walks slower than you.”28


25
   Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 131.
26
   Ibid.
27
   Ibid., 143.
28
   Quoted at ibid.


                                             8
Amphiboly
        A statement is rendered amphibolous when the loose or awkward
combination of its words renders its meaning indeterminate. It can be true on one
interpretation and false on another. “When it is stated as premiss with the
interpretation that makes it true, and a conclusion is drawn from it on the
interpretation that makes it false, then the fallacy of amphiboly has been
committed.”29 Ancient oracles often has amphiblous utterances.

          Croesus, the king of Lydia, is said to have consulted the Oracle of Delphi before
          beginning his war with the kingdom of Persia. “If Croesus went to war with
          Cyrus,” came the oracular reply, “he would destroy a mighty kingdom.”
          Delighted with this prediction, which he took to mean that he would destroy the
          mighty kingdom of Persia, he attacked and was crushed by Cyrus, king of the
          Persians. His life having been spared, he complained bitterly to the Oracle, whose
          priests pointed out in reply that the Oracle had been entirely right: In going to
          war, Croesus had destroyed a mighty kingdom – his own! Amphibolous
          statements make dangerous premisses.30

Accent
       “When a premiss relies for its apparent meaning on one possible emphasis,
but a conclusion is drawn from it that relies on the meaning of the same words
accented differently, the fallacy of accent is committed.”31 Consider the statement: We
should not speak ill of our friends. Copi and Cohen comment:

          At least five distinct meanings – or more? – can be given to those eight words,
          depending on which one of them is emphasized. When read without any undue
          stresses, the injunction is perfectly sound. If the conclusion is drawn from it,
          however, that we should feel free to speak ill of someone who is not our friend,
          this conclusion follows only if the premiss has the meaning it acquires when its
          last word is accented. But when its last word is accented it is no longer acceptable
          as a moral rule; it has a different meaning, and it is, in fact, a different premiss.
          The argument is a case of fallacy of accent. So, too, would be the argument that
          drew from the same premiss the conclusion that we are free to work ill on our
          friends if only we do not speak it – and similarly with the other fallacious
          inferences that suggest themselves.32

        A damaging use of accent occurs when, in referring to another’s writings, the
author inserts or deletes italics or omits a qualification made by the original writer; in
other cases paraphrasing may greatly change the meaning of the original writer. Thus, for
example, an original statement might be: “George Harris is considered in liberal circles to
be this generation’s most gifted journalist.” Harris may then quote this statement, but
alter its accent as follows: “I am considered to be this generation’s most gifted

29
   Ibid., 145.
30
   Ibid.
31
   Ibid.
32
   Ibid., 146.


                                               9
journalist.” The omission of the reference to “liberal circles” greatly distorts the sense of
the original statement.

        To avoid such distortions, and the fallacies of accent that maybe built on them, the
        responsible writer must be scrupulously accurate in quotation, always indicating
        whether italics were in the original, indicating (with dots) whether the passages
        have been omitted, and so on.33

Composition
        There are two closely related types of argument that are fallacies of compostion.
Fallacy of composition entails “reasoning fallaciously from the attributes of the parts
of a whole to the attributes of the whole itself.”34 One example would be to argue that
“since every part of a certain machine is light in weight, the machine “as a whole” is light
in weight.”35 It should be obvious that the many light parts may in fact make the machine
very heavy. Each part of a piece of music may be a paradigm of musical perfection but
this does not mean that the work as a whole is a paradigm of musical perfection.
        In the second type of fallacy of composition, “the fallacious reasoning is from
attributes of the individual elements or members of a collection to attributes of the
collection of totality of those elements.”36 This second kind of composition fallacy may
be defined as “the invalid inference that what may truly be predicated of a term
distributively may also be truly predicated of the term collectively.”37 Thus, for example,
we may say that the atomic bombs dropped during World War II did more damage than
the conventional bombs dropped – but only distributively. Collectively, because there
were many more of them, conventional bombs did more damage than the atomic ones.
        It helps to keep in mind that a mere collection of parts is no machine; a collection
of bricks is not a house or a wall. A machine, a house, a wall, and so on, are composed of
parts arranged in certain and definite ways. Two more examples:

        [T]he universe is spherical in form … because all the constituent part of the
        universe, that is the sun, moon, and the planets, appear in this form.38

        But space is nothing but a relation. For, in the first place, any space must consist
        of parts; and if the parts are not spaces, the whole is not space.39

Division
        The fallacy of division mirrors that of composition. There are two kinds. “The
first kind of division consists in arguing fallaciously that what is true of a whole
must also be true of its parts.”40 To argue, for example, that a particular company is
important and that therefore a particular employee of that company must also be

33
   Ibid.
34
   Ibid., 148.
35
   Ibid.
36
   Ibid.
37
   Ibid.
38
   Nicolaus Copernicus, “The New Idea of the Universe.” Quoted in Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 152.
39
   F.H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality. Quoted in Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 153.
40
   Copi and Cohen, Introduction, 149.


                                                  10
important is to commit the fallacy of division. Another example would be to argue that
because a machine is heavy, all of its constituent parts are also heavy.
        “The second type of division of fallacy is committed when one argues from
the attributes of a collection of elements to the attributes of the elements
themselves.”41 Oftentimes this kind of fallacy can seem like perfectly valid arguments
for they take the same form as the following valid argument:

           Dogs are carnivorous.
           Afghan hounds are dogs.
           Therefore Afghan hounds are carnivorous.42

The following argument is however invalid, committing the fallacy of division:

           Dogs are frequently encountered in the streets.
           Afghan hounds are dogs.
           Therefore Afghan hounds are frequently encountered in the streets.43

       There are certain similarities between the fallacies of division and accident, on the
one hand, and the fallacies of composition and converse accident, on the other hand. Copi
and Cohen explain:
       If we were to infer, from looking at one or two parts of a large machine that,
       because they happen to be well designed, every one of its many parts if well
       designed, we would commit the fallacy of converse accident, for what is true
       about one or two surely may not be true of all. If we were to examine every single
       part and find each carefully made, and from that finding infer that the entire
       machine is carefully made, we would also reason fallaciously, because, however
       carefully the parts were produced, they may have been assembled awkwardly or
       carelessly. But here the fallacy is one of composition. In converse accident, one
       argues that some atypical members of a class have a specified attribute, and
       therefore that all members of the class, distributively, have that attribute; in
       composition, one argues that, since each and every member of the class has the
       attribute, the class itself (collectively) has that attribute. The difference is great. In
       converse accident, all predications are distributive, whereas in composition, the
       mistaken inference is from distributive to collective predication.44

        Similar remarks can be made about the fallacies of division and accident. In
division the mistake is to think that since the class itself possesses a particular attribute,
each member of the class also possesses it. Thus, argues the fallacy of division, because
the a particular country is economically rich, each citizen is rich. In the fallacy of
accident, the argument is that because some rule applies in general, there are no special
instances in which it might not apply. Thus, the fallacy of accident occurs in the
argument that someone should be charged with grievous bodily harm – in spite of the fact

41
   Ibid.
42
   Ibid.
43
   Ibid.
44
   Ibid.


                                               11
that the person he harmed was a criminal who attacked him in the course of burgling his
house.
        In the cases of the fallacies of composition and division, as also of equivocation,
amphiboly and accent, ambiguity is present. When the meaning of words or phrases shifts
in the course of an argument, logical errors will arise.




                                            12
